



Behçet's syndrome is classically characterized as a triad of symptoms that include recurring crops of mouth ulcers (aphthous ulcers, canker sores), genital ulcers, and inflammation of a specialized area around the pupil of the eye termed the uvea. The inflammation of the area of the eye that is around the pupil is called uveitis. Behçet's syndrome is also sometimes referred to as Behçet's disease.



The cause of Behçet's syndrome is not known. The disease is relatively rare but is more frequent and severe in patients from the Eastern Mediterranean and Asia than those of European descent. Both inherited (genetic) and environmental factors, such as microbial infections, are suspected to be factors that contribute to the development of Behçet's. Behçet's is not known to be contagious.
Behçet's Syndrome Center
Rheumatoid Arthritis Slideshow Pictures
Joint-Friendly Exercises to Reduce RA Pain Slideshow
Take the RA Quiz
Patient Comments: Behcet's Syndrome - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Behcet's Syndrome - Effective Treatments
Patient Comments: Behcet's Syndrome - Experience
Patient Comments: Behcet's Syndrome - Diagnosis
Behçet's syndrome facts
What is Behçet's syndrome?
What causes and contagious of Behçet's syndrome?
What are symptoms of Behçet's syndrome?
How is Behçet's syndrome diagnosed?
What is the treatment of Behçet's syndrome?
Behçet's syndrome is associated with inflammation of various areas of the body.
Symptoms of Behçet's syndrome depend on the body areas affected including:Arteries that supply blood to the body's tissuesVeins that take the blood back to the lungsThe back of the eyes (retina)BrainJointsSkinBowels
Arteries that supply blood to the body's tissues
Veins that take the blood back to the lungs
The back of the eyes (retina)
Brain
Joints
Skin
Bowels
Recurrent mouth ulcers are characteristic of Behçet's syndrome.
Treatment of Behçet's syndrome depends on the severity and the location of its manifestations.

            
            Readers Comments 10
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
