



Churg-Strauss syndrome is one of many forms of vasculitis. Vasculitis diseases are characterized by inflammation of blood vessels. Churg-Strauss syndrome, in particular, occurs in patients with a history of asthma or allergy and features inflammation of blood vessels (also referred to as angiitis) in the lungs, skin, nerves, and abdomen. The blood vessels involved in Churg-Strauss syndrome are small arteries and veins. 


Churg-Strauss syndrome is rare. The cause of the syndrome is not known, but it involves an abnormal over-activation of the immune system in a person with underlying bronchospastic lung disease (asthma). While Churg-Strauss syndrome has been reported to be associated with certain asthma medications, called leukotriene modifiers, whether they actually cause the disease or whether the patients that take them have more severe asthma that lends a tendency toward the development of Churg-Strauss is not yet clear. 
Churg-Strauss Syndrome Center
Asthma Slideshow Pictures
Take the Asthma Quiz!
Asthma Myths and Facts
Patient Comments: Churg-Strauss Syndrome - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Churg-Strauss Syndrome - Treatments
Patient Comments: Churg-Strauss Syndrome - Patient Experience
Find a local Pulmonologist in your town
Churg-Strauss syndrome facts
What is Churg-Strauss syndrome?
What causes Churg-Strauss syndrome?
What are symptoms of Churg-Strauss syndrome?
How is Churg-Strauss syndrome diagnosed?
How is Churg-Strauss syndrome treated?
What is the outlook (prognosis) for patients with Churg-Strauss syndrome?

            
            Readers Comments 2
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
Churg-Strauss syndrome is a disease characterized by inflammation of the blood vessels.
Churg-Strauss syndrome occurs in patients with a history of asthma or allergy.
Symptoms of Churg-Strauss syndrome include fatigue, weight loss, nasal passage inflammation, numbness, and weakness.
The ultimate test for the diagnosis is a biopsy of involved tissue.
Treatment of Churg-Strauss syndrome involves stopping inflammation and suppressing the immune system.
