



There are two major forms of diabetes - type 1 and type 2. This article focuses specifically on the prevention of type 2 diabetes since there is no know way to prevent type 1 diabetes. This form of diabetes is virtually a pandemic in the United States. This information reviews the risk factors for developing type 2 diabetes and reviews key points regarding prediction of those at risk for type 2 diabetes. It also is a review of what they can do about it.
While diabetes is characterized by high blood sugar values, type 2 diabetes is also associated with a condition known as insulin resistance. Even though there is an element of impaired insulin secretion from the beta cells of the pancreas, especially when toxic levels of glucose occur (when blood sugars are constantly very high), the major defect in type 2 diabetes is the body's inability to respond properly to insulin.
Eventually, even though the pancreas is working at its best to produce more and more insulin, the body tissues (for example, muscle and fat cells) do not respond and become insensitive to the insulin. At this point, overt diabetes occurs as the body is no longer able to effectively use its insulin to maintain normal blood sugar levels. Over time, these high levels of sugar result in the complications we see all too often in patients with diabetes.
Preventing Diabetes Naturally (Type 2, Diet, Causes, Symptoms) Center
Type 2 Diabetes: Learn the Warning Signs
Diabetes Friendly Dining
Type 2 Diabetes: Test Your Medical IQ
Patient Comments: Diabetes Prevention - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Diabetes Prevention - Diet
Patient Comments: Diabetes Prevention - Experience
Find a local Family Physician in your town
Type 2 diabetes prevention tips and facts
What is type 2 diabetes? What causes it?
What are symptoms of prediabetes?
Can type 2 diabetes be prevented naturally?
What type of diet helps prevent diabetes?
What are the risk factors for developing diabetes?
Is gestational diabetes a risk for developing type 2 diabetes later in life?
What treatment medications help prevent type 2 diabetes?

            
            Readers Comments 1
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
While genetics plays an important role in the development of diabetes, an individual still has the ability to influence their health to prevent type 2 diabetes.
There is no known way to prevent type 1 diabetes. This article focuses on ways to control risk factors for type 2 diabetes.
Obesity and a sedentary lifestyle are the biggest diabetes risk factors that are controllable.
People should watch their weight and exercise on a regular basis to help reverse prediabetes, and prevent the development of type 2 diabetes.
Diet is important because it helps with weight loss. Some foods such as nuts in small amounts provide health benefits in blood sugar regulation.
There is no single recommended diabetes prevention diet, but following a sound nutrition plan and maintaining a healthy weight are important steps in preventing the disease.
Exercise is beneficial even without weight loss in the prevention of type 2 diabetes.
Exercise is even more beneficial with weight loss in the prevention of type 2 diabetes.
Smoking is harmful in many ways including increasing the risk of cancer and heart disease. It also increases the risk of developing type 2 diabetes.
There are medications available that have been shown in large trials to delay or prevent the onset of overt diabetes. Metformin (Glucophage) is recommended by the American Diabetes Association for prevention of diabetes in high-risk people.
The coming years will be very exciting regarding the advances in the field of prevention of diabetes. However, the cornerstone of therapy will likely remain a healthy lifestyle.
