



Melasma is a very common patchy brown, tan, or blue-gray facial skin discoloration, usually seen in women in the reproductive years. It typically appears on the upper cheeks, upper lip, forehead, and chin of women 20-50 years of age. It is uncommon in males. It is thought to be primarily related to external sun exposure, external hormones like birth control pills, and internal hormonal changes as seen in pregnancy. Most people with melasma have a history of daily or intermittent sun exposure, although heat is also suspected to be an underlying factor. Melasma is most common among pregnant women, especially those of Latin and Asian descents. People with olive or darker skin, like Hispanic, Asian, and Middle Eastern individuals, have higher incidences of melasma.
Prevention is primarily aimed at facial sun protection and sun avoidance. Treatment requires regular sunscreen application, medications such as 4% hydroquinone and other fading creams.
Melasma Center
Stages of Pregnancy Slideshow Pictures
Slideshow of Early Pregnancy Symptoms
Early Pregnancy Symptoms Quiz
Patient Comments: Melasma - Causes
Patient Comments: Melasma - Location on Body
Patient Comments: Melasma - Treatment
Patient Comments: Melasma - Prognosis
Find a local Dermatologist in your town
Melasma facts
What is melasma? What are symptoms and/or signs of melasma?
What causes melasma?
Where is melasma seen on the body?
What are the types of melasma?
How do health care professionals diagnose melasma?
What is the treatment for melasma?
What melasma treatments can I have at my doctor's office?
Do lasers work for melasma?
How does hydroquinone work in melasma?
Are there non-hydroquinone alternative treatments for melasma?
What SPF is recommended for melasma?
Is it possible to prevent melasma?
What is the prognosis for melasma?
Melasma causes brown, tan, or blue-gray spots on the face (hyperpigmentation).
Melasma is most common in women 20-50 years of age.
Melasma is characterized by three location patterns (central face, cheekbone, and jawline).
Melasma is caused partly by sun, genetic predisposition, and hormonal changes.
The condition is frequently treated with topical creams containing hydroquinone.
Melasma prevention requires sun avoidance and sun protection with hats and sunscreen.
