



Optic neuritis is an inflammation that affects the myelin lining of the optic nerve, which transmits visual stimuli to the brain. The optic nerve is actually a nerve tract of axons that originate in the ganglion cells of the retina in the back of the eye. Nerve tracts are the information pathways in the brain. The "optic nerves" are the only nerve tracts not located entirely within the brain. The optic nerves carry visual information from the retina to the area of the brain that recognizes vision (the occipital cortex).
Optic neuritis can occur in children or adults and may involve either one or both optic nerves. Optic neuritis typically affects young adults ranging from 20 to 40 years of age. There is a strong female predominance. The annual incidence is approximately 6.4/100,000.
Optic Neuritis Center
Eye Diseases Pictures Slideshow 
Pink Eye Slideshow Pictures
Eyes and Eye Conditions Quiz
Patient Comments: Optic Neuritis - Treatments
Patient Comments: Optic Neuritis - Experience
Patient Comments: Optic Neuritis - Symptoms and Signs
Find a local Eye Doctor in your town
Optic neuritis facts
What is optic neuritis?
What causes optic neuritis?
What are optic neuritis risk factors?
What are symptoms of optic neuritis?
What are signs of optic neuritis?
What types of doctors treat optic neuritis?
How do health care professionals diagnose optic neuritis?
What is the treatment for optic neuritis?
What is the prognosis for optic neuritis?
Is it possible to prevent optic neuritis?
Where can I find more information on optic neuritis?
Optic neuritis is inflammation of the optic nerve.
Optic neuritis most commonly affects young adults in one eye.
Optic neuritis is frequently associated with multiple sclerosis. Other causes include infections, autoimmune disease, and injury to the optic nerve.
The symptoms of optic neuritis include vision loss, reduced color vision, and pain on movement of the eye with recovery over weeks to a month, in most cases.
The diagnosis is made on the basis of the patient history and an examination by an ophthalmologist. An MRI is important to look for lesions that indicate the patient may develop multiple sclerosis. Blood tests may be indicated.
High-dose IV corticosteroids speed up recovery, but appear to have no effect on the long-term outcome.

            
            Readers Comments 12
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
