



Osteochondritis dissecans is a joint condition whereby a variable amount of bone and its adjacent cartilage loses its blood supply. Osteochondritis dissecans can involve the bone and cartilage of virtually any joint. Elbows and knees are most commonly affected. Usually, only a small portion of the affected cartilage is involved. Osteochondritis dissecans most commonly affects boys between 9 and 18 years of age.


The cause of osteochondritis dissecans is often unknown. Theories include mild recurrent injuries or growth disturbances.


Symptoms of osteochondritis dissecans are a direct result of the irregularity of the cartilage within the affected joint. Symptoms include joint pain, stiffness, and even locking of the joint so that its range of motion is significantly limited to the point that it cannot be moved beyond a limited range. For example, when osteochondritis dissecans affects the elbow, the joint may not move beyond 90 degrees of extension instead of being able to fully extend straight to 180 degrees.
Osteochondritis Dissecans Center
Rheumatoid Arthritis Slideshow Pictures
Joint-Friendly Exercises to Reduce RA Pain Slideshow
Take the RA Quiz
Patient Comments: Osteochondritis Dissecans - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Osteochondritis Dissecans - Treatments
Osteochondritis dissecans facts
What is osteochondritis dissecans?
What causes osteochondritis dissecans?
What are symptoms of osteochondritis dissecans?
How do health care professionals diagnose osteochondritis dissecans?
What is the treatment of osteochondritis dissecans?
What is the prognosis of osteochondritis dissecans?
Is it possible to prevent osteochondritis dissecans?
Osteochondritis dissecans is a joint condition whereby a variable amount of bone and its adjacent cartilage loses its blood supply.
Osteochondritis dissecans causes irregularity and fragility of affected cartilage. As a result, it is possible for portions of cartilage to become lodged within the joint, leading to limitation in motion.
The cause of osteochondritis dissecans is often unknown.
Symptoms include joint pain, stiffness, and even locking of the joint.
Osteochondritis dissecans is best diagnosed with imaging studies.
Arthroscopic surgery is a procedure that is frequently used as a treatment to remove the loose cartilage and bone tissue from the joint.

            
            Readers Comments 4
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
