




The connective tissues are the structural portions of the body 
that essentially hold the body cells together. These tissues form a 
framework or matrix for the body, and are composed of two major structural molecules, collagen and elastin. There are many different collagen protein types which vary in abundance depending on body area. Elastin is another protein which has the capability of stretching and returning to original length like a spring.
Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE) is a rare disorder of degeneration 
of the elastic fibers with tiny areas of calcification in the skin, 
back of the eyes (retinae), and blood vessels. Interestingly, while 
elastin is the major component of ligaments (tissues which attach 
bone to bone), the ligaments are not apparently affected by PXE. 


PXE is inherited from the parents, either as an autosomal recessive or as an autosomal dominant trait. Identification of the gene responsible for PXE can facilitate the determination of the exact patterns of inheritance. Pseudoxanthoma elasticum is an inherited disorder of elastin.



PXE typically causes yellow-white small raised areas in the skin 
folds, often appearing in the second or third decades of life. These 
skin abnormalities frequently appear on the neck, armpits, and other 
areas that bend a great deal (referred to as flexure areas). The face 
is not affected by PXE. The doctor can often see abnormalities in the 
back of the eye (retinae) called angioid streaks, which are tiny 
breaks in the elastin-filled tissue there. These eye abnormalities 
can lead to blindness.
Other areas that can be affected in PXE include the heart which 
can be affected by atherosclerosis and mitral valve prolapse. Small 
blood vessels are abnormally fragile in patients with PXE because the 
blood vessel walls contain elastin and are weakened. This can lead to 
abnormal bleeding in such areas as the bowel and, very rarely, the 
uterus. Impairment of circulation to the legs can lead to pains in 
the legs while walking (claudication).



There is no cure for PXE. Treatment of patients with PXE involves 
monitoring organ function and consequences of the effects of the 
weakened elastin fibers in the body as well as measures to prevent 
injury and promote overall health.
For further information about Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum, please 
visit the following site: PXE International: Pseudoxanthoma 
Elasticum.
Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum (PXE) Center
Rheumatoid Arthritis Slideshow Pictures
Joint-Friendly Exercises to Reduce RA Pain Slideshow
Take the RA Quiz
Pseudoxanthoma elasticum facts
What is pseudoxanthoma elasticum?
How is pseudoxanthoma elasticum inherited?
What are symptoms of pseudoxanthoma elasticum?
What is the treatment for patients with pseudoxanthoma
elasticum?
Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE) is a rare disorder involving degeneration of the elastic fibers.
PXE is inherited from the parents.
PXE typically causes yellow-white small raised areas in the skin folds (flexure areas).
PXE can affect areas of the body other than the skin.
Treatment of PXE involves monitoring by the doctor and measures to prevent injury and promote overall health.

            
            Share Your Story
        
