



Scleritis is inflammation of the sclera, the white portion of the eye.


The sclera is the tough, white fibrous outer wall layer of the eyeball. It is a type of connective tissue. The sclera provides both the white color of the eye and maintains the shape of the eyeball. It extends from the edge of the cornea (the clear, dome-shaped window in the front of the eye) around to the optic nerve in the back of the eye.


Scleritis is an uncommon disease and is differentiated from episcleritis, which is inflammation of the surface membrane covering the sclera and is a more common eye condition. In episcleritis, only the superficial tissue between the white of the eye (sclera) and the blood vessel-filled covering (conjunctiva) is inflamed.
Approximately one-half of scleritis cases are associated with underlying diseases that affect the body internally (systemic diseases). Connective tissue disorders, autoimmune diseases, and generalized vasculitic abnormalities may all first appear as scleritis or manifest themselves as scleritis at some other time during the course of the underlying disease.
Scleritis may be seen in association with systemic lupus erythematosus, arthritis, other types of inflammatory arthritis (ankylosing spondylitis, reactive arthritis, gouty arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, relapsing polychondritis), polyarteritis nodosa, mixed connective tissue disease, progressive systemic sclerosis (scleroderma), granulomatous polyangiitis, polymyositis, Sjögren's syndrome, giant cell arteritis, inflammatory bowel disease, and allergic angiitis.
Scleritis may be the initial manifestation of these underlying illnesses. Some of these conditions are organ-threatening and potentially lethal.
Scleritis can also be the result of an infectious process caused by bacteria including pseudomonas, fungi, mycobacterium, viruses, or parasites. Trauma, chemical exposure, or postsurgical inflammation can also cause scleritis.
No cause is found in some cases of scleritis.
Scleritis may affect either one or both eyes. In patients with disease in both eyes, an underlying systemic cause is almost always found.
Scleritis Center
Eye Diseases Pictures Slideshow 
Pink Eye Slideshow Pictures
Eyes and Eye Conditions Quiz
Patient Comments: Scleritis - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Scleritis - Risk Factors
Patient Comments: Scleritis - Treatment
Find a local Doctor in your town
Scleritis facts
What is scleritis?
What is the sclera?
What causes scleritis?
Is scleritis contagious?
What are risk factors for scleritis?
What are symptoms of scleritis?
What are signs of scleritis?
Scleritis vs. episcleritis
Scleritis vs. conjunctivitis
What is necrotizing scleritis?
What specialists treat scleritis?
How do health care professionals diagnose scleritis?
What is the treatment for scleritis?
Are there home remedies for scleritis?
What are the complications of scleritis?
What is the prognosis for scleritis?
Is it possible to prevent scleritis?
What research is being done on scleritis?
Scleritis is inflammation of the white portion of the eye, the sclera.
Scleritis is a serious eye disease that is often associated with underlying autoimmune disorders.
Prompt diagnosis and treatment of scleritis is essential to prevent permanent vision loss.
