



Sleepwalking is characterized by a complex action behavior (walking) during sleep. Occasionally, the person may talk, but it does not make sense. The person's eyes are commonly open, but have a characteristic glassy "look right through you" character.
Sleepwalking most commonly occurs during early childhood and less commonly during adolescence.


One common misconception is that a person sleepwalking should not be awakened. It is not dangerous to awaken a sleepwalker, although it is common for the person to be confused or disoriented for a short time when awake. Another misconception is that a person cannot be injured while sleepwalking. Injuries caused by sleepwalking, for example, tripping and loss of balance, are common.


Sleepwalking has been described in medical literature dating before Hippocrates (460 BC-370 BC). In Shakespeare's tragic play, Macbeth, Lady Macbeth's famous sleepwalking scene ("out, damned spot") is ascribed to her guilt and resulting insanity as a consequence of her involvement in the murder of her father-in-law.
Parasomnias are a group of sleep behaviors common in in children, teens, and occasionally adults. To understand parasomnias, it is helpful to understand the physiology of sleep.
Sleep occurs in two broad categories defined by characteristic changes during an EEG (electro encephalogram, “brain wave test”). The two categories are REM (rapid eye movement) and non-REM (NREM) sleep cycles. Non-REM sleep has four “levels” characterized by unique patterns of the EEG.
An entire sleep cycle from Stage I (non-REM) thru REM sleep lasts between 90 and-120 minutes and repeats 4 to 5 times during the sleep experience. Each “level” of non-REM and REM sleep last between 5 to 15 minutes. A large Canadian study reviewed sleep patterns of children aged 2.5 to 6 years and discovered approximately 88% of them experienced parasomnias, and 15% were sleepwalkers. Other signs and symptoms associated with sleepwalking were: (1) sleep terrors (40%), (2) sleep enuresis (bedwetting, 25%), (3) bruxism (grinding of the teeth, 46%), and rhythmic movements (such as head banging, 9%).
Sleepwalking characteristically occurs during the first or second sleep cycles, specifically, during stages III and IV, otherwise known as deep sleep. Due the short time frame involved, sleepwalking tends not to occur during naps.
Sleepwalking activity may include simply sitting up and appearing awake while remaining asleep, getting up and walking around, or complex activities such as moving furniture, going to the bathroom, dressing and undressing, and similar activities. Some people even drive a car while actually asleep. The episode can be very brief (a few seconds or minutes) or can last for 30 minutes or longer.
Upon waking, the sleepwalker has no memory of his or her behaviors.
Sleepwalking Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment Center
Causes of Fatigue Slideshow Pictures
Sleep Quiz: Test Your Medical IQ
Sleep  Slideshow: Foods That Help or Harm Your Sleep
Patient Comments: Sleepwalking - Experiences
Patient Comments: Sleepwalking - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Sleepwalking - Causes
Find a local Sleep Specialist in your town
Sleepwalking definition and facts
What is sleepwalking?
What do you do when someone is sleepwalking? Should you wake them up?
Why do people walk in their sleep?
What causes sleepwalking?
What are symptoms of sleepwalking? How can you tell if they are sleepwalking?
What tests diagnose sleepwalking?
How do you stop sleepwalking? What is the treatment or cure?
What other sleep conditions have similar symptoms of sleepwalking?
What are the complications of sleepwalking?
How can you prevent sleepwalking?
What is the prognosis of sleepwalking?
When should you call your health care professional about sleepwalking?
Sleepwalking is relatively common in younger children and the frequency is much less in adolescents.
Although disruptive and frightening for parents in the short-term, sleepwalking is not associated with long-term complications.
Factors predisposing to sleepwalking are genetic influences, environmental influences, and physiologic factors.
The diagnosis of sleepwalking with history and exam. Laboratory or radiological studies rarely are necessary.
Several conditions are similar to sleepwalking so the doctor will need to eliminate them in order to diagnose sleepwalking.
There are treatments options to consider when dealing with a child who sleepwalks.
The outlook for resolution of the disorder is excellent.

            
            Readers Comments 9
        

            
            Share Your Story
        

            
            Readers Comments 1
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
Stage I: introduction to sleep during which there is generalized muscle relaxation and effort is required to keep your eyes open.
Stage II: beginning to sleep (light sleep)
Stage III and IV: deep sleep
REM sleep: associated with dreaming
