



Takayasu disease is a chronic inflammation of the large blood vessels that distribute blood from the heart, including the aorta and its main branches. Inflammation of blood vessels is also called vasculitis. It is most common in women of Asian descent. It usually begins between 10 and 30 years of age.
Takayasu disease has also been referred to as pulseless disease, aortic arch syndrome, Takayasu's disease, and Takayasu's arteritis.


The cause of Takayasu disease is unknown. The immune system in patients with Takayasu disease seems to be misdirected to cause inflammation of arteries (arteritis). White blood cells called T lymphocytes are part of the inflammation.


The inflammation of the aorta and its branch arteries can lead to poor blood supply to tissues of the body in patients with Takayasu disease. This can cause painful, cool, or blanched extremities, dizziness, headaches, chest pain, and abdominal pain. Other symptoms can include fatigue, weight loss, and low-grade fever.
Takayasu Disease (Takayasu Arteritis) Center
Rheumatoid Arthritis Slideshow Pictures
Joint-Friendly Exercises to Reduce RA Pain Slideshow
Take the RA Quiz
Patient Comments: Takayasu Disease - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Takayasu Disease - Treatment
Find a local Rheumatologist in your town
Takayasu disease facts
What is Takayasu disease?
What causes Takayasu disease?
What are symptoms of Takayasu disease?
How do health care professionals diagnose Takayasu disease?
What are treatment options for Takayasu disease?
What is the long-term prognosis for patients with Takayasu disease?
Is it possible to prevent Takayasu disease?
Takayasu disease is a chronic inflammation of the large blood vessels that distributes blood from the heart.
The cause of Takayasu disease is unknown.
Symptoms of Takayasu disease include painful, cool, or blanched extremities, dizziness, headaches, chest pain, and abdominal pain.
The diagnosis of Takayasu disease involves detecting abnormal narrowing of the characteristic blood vessels.
The treatment of Takayasu disease involves suppressing the inflammation in the blood vessels. Surgical procedures can be required.

            
            Readers Comments 9
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
