



Tennis elbow is inflammation of the tendon at the outer portion of the elbow, leading to pain. Classically, tennis elbow is a strain injury to this tendon from hitting a backhand shot at tennis. The medical term for tennis elbow is lateral epicondylitis because it involves inflammation at the insertion point of the tendon at the outer portion of the humerus bone at the elbow joint (the epicondyle). Most people with lateral epicondylitis actually acquire it from activities other than playing tennis.
In contrast, when the tendon that attaches at the inner portion of the elbow is inflamed, the condition is referred to as medial epicondylitis (or "golfer's elbow" because golfers commonly injure this area after striking the ground to take a deep divot).


A strain injury to the tendon at the outer portion of the elbow causes tennis elbow. While this can occur by straining during a backhand tennis shot, it can also occur from many repetitive activities that can strain the elbow. These activities include using a screwdriver or work that includes similar motions, Frisbee disc throwing, and lifting objects by extending the wrist, etc.
Tennis Elbow Center
Take the Pain Quiz
Surprising Reasons You're in Pain Slideshow
Chronic Pain Slideshow
Patient Comments: Tennis Elbow - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Tennis Elbow - Causes
Patient Comments: Tennis Elbow - Treatment
Find a local Doctor in your town
Tennis elbow facts
What is tennis elbow?
What causes tennis elbow?
What are tennis 
elbow risk factors?
What are symptoms of tennis elbow?
How do physicians diagnose tennis elbow?
What is the treatment for tennis elbow?
What is the outlook (prognosis) for tennis elbow?
Is it possible to prevent tennis elbow?
Tennis elbow is tendinitis of the outer elbow.
Strain of an elbow tendon causes tennis elbow.
Risks of tennis elbow include activities that can strain the elbow.
Tennis elbow symptoms include dull pain and tenderness at the outer elbow often with a sensation of weakness and stiffness.
A physician uses a patient's history and physical examination to diagnose tennis elbow.
The standard treatment for tennis elbow involves measures to reduce the local inflammation.
The prognosis for tennis elbow is excellent.
It's possible to prevent tennis elbow by avoiding activities that strain the elbow.

            
            Readers Comments 4
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
