



Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (GPA) is an uncommon type of inflammation of small arteries and veins (vasculitis). It classically involves inflammation of the arteries that supply blood to the tissues of the lungs, the nasal passages (sinuses), and the kidneys. "Incomplete" forms exist that only involve one of these areas. When both lungs and kidneys are affected, the condition is sometimes referred to as generalized granulomatosis with polyangiitis. When only the lungs are involved, the condition is sometimes referred to as limited granulomatosis with polyangiitis. The terminology "granulomatosis with polyangiitis" highlights the two central pathologic features of the disease, granuloma formation and inflammation of blood vessels (angiitis or vasculitis).
The name "Wegener's granulomatosis" is no longer used because the German physician Friedrich Wegener, the disease's former namesake, was a member of the Nazi party and allegedly linked to Nazi war crimes.
Granulomatosis with polyangiitisusually affects young or middle-aged adults. Although it is uncommon in children, it can affect people at any age. The cause of the condition is not known.
Granulomatosis with Polyangiitis Center
Rheumatoid Arthritis Slideshow Pictures
Joint-Friendly Exercises to Reduce RA Pain Slideshow
Take the RA Quiz
Patient Comments: Wegener's Granulomatosis - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Wegener's Granulomatosis - Treatment
Patient Comments: Wegener's Granulomatosis - Experience
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis definition and facts
What is granulomatosis with polyangiitis?
What are symptoms of granulomatosis with polyangiitis?
How is granulomatosis with polyangiitis diagnosed?
What is the treatment for granulomatosis with polyangiitis?
What is the prognosis for granulomatosis with polyangiitis?

            
            Readers Comments 4
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis is an uncommon disease that involves inflammation of blood vessels (vasculitis).
Symptoms of granulomatosis with polyangiitis include:fatigue,weight loss,fevers,shortness of breath,bloody sputum,joint pains, andsinus inflammation.
fatigue,
weight loss,
fevers,
shortness of breath,
bloody sputum,
joint pains, and
sinus inflammation.
Diagnosis of granulomatosis with polyangiitis is confirmed by detecting both abnormal cellular formations, called granulomas, and vasculitis.
Treatment is directed toward stopping the inflammation process by suppressing the immune system.
