



Yaws is a common chronic infectious disease that occurs mainly in warm humid regions such as the tropical areas of Africa, Asia, South and Central Americas, plus the Pacific Islands. The disease has many names (for example, pian, parangi, paru, frambesia tropica). Yaws usually features lesions that appear as bumps on the skin of the face, hands, feet, and genital area. The disease most often starts as a single lesion that becomes slightly elevated, develops a crust that is shed, leaving a base that resembles the texture of a raspberry or strawberry. This primary lesion is termed the mother yaw (also termed buba, buba madre, or primary frambesioma). Secondary lesions, termed daughter yaws, develop in about six to 16 weeks after the primary lesion. Almost all cases of yaws begin in children under 15 years of age, with the peak incidence in 6- to 10-year-old children. The incidence is about the same in males and females. Yaws is a member of the treponematoses, diseases caused by spiral bacteria in the genus Treponema; besides yaws, the disease include endemic syphilis (bejel) and pinta. Of these three diseases, yaws is the most common.
Yaws Center
Adult Skin Problems Slideshow
Quiz: Is Ringworm Contagious?
Gallery of Skin Problems Pictures
Patient Comments: Yaws - Symptoms
Yaws facts
What is yaws? What are symptoms of yaws?
What causes yaws?
What are risk factors for yaws?
How does yaws begin and spread?
Why is this disease called yaws?
What are developmental stages in the course of yaws?
What types of specialists treat yaws?
How do health-care professionals diagnose yaws?
What is the treatment for yaws?
Why is yaws a serious problem?
What is the prognosis of yaws?
Is it possible to prevent yaws?
Yaws is a common disease of children in the tropics.
Yaws is a chronic, relapsing infectious illness.
Yaws first affects the skin and later possibly the bones and joints as well.
Yaws is caused by a bacterium, the spirochete Treponema pertenue.
Transmission is by skin-to-skin contact; the bacteria cannot penetrate normal skin but can enter through a scrape or cut in the skin, so yaws risk factors are direct skin contact with an infected individual and having a scrape or a cut in the skin.
Yaws is promoted by overcrowding and poor hygiene.
Yaws (except for tertiary yaws) may be cured by a single shot of benzathine penicillin or an oral dose of azithromycin.


            
            Readers Comments 1
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
