Medical Author: 
Jay W. 
Marks, MD
Medical Editor: Bhupinder Anand, MD
Abdominal adhesions are important because they are a common cause of 
abdominal symptoms, particularly abdominal pain. The term adhesions refers to 
the formation of scar tissue between bowel loops (small or large intestine) and 
the inner lining of the abdominal wall (peritoneal lining) or with other organs 
within the abdominal cavity (liver, gallbladder, uterus and its attached 
Fallopian tubes and ovaries, and urinary bladder). Adhesions can also form 
between loops of the small and large intestine.
Adhesions form when inflammation occurs on the surface of the abdominal 
organs or the peritoneal lining of the abdominal cavity; the formation of scar 
tissue is a normal part of healing when there is inflammation. The cause of the 
inflammation can vary considerably. It may be due to inflammation of an organ 
(for example, cholecystitis,
appendicitis), prior surgery in which organs or the 
peritoneal lining are cut, inflammation of the peritoneal lining of the abdomen 
(peritonitis), or abdominal radiation treatment. Other causes of inflammation 
and scarring include:...


Abdominal adhesions are bands of tissue that form between abdominal tissues and organs. 
these vary from a consistency of wet tissue paper, which are of little 
significance, to a strong, fibrous band that can readily cause obstruction. Normally, internal tissues and organs have slippery surfaces, which allow them to shift easily as the body moves. Adhesions cause tissues and organs to stick together.
The intestines are part of the digestive system. Abdominal adhesions can cause an intestinal obstruction.
Although most adhesions cause no symptoms or problems, others cause chronic abdominal or pelvic pain. Adhesions are also a major cause of intestinal obstruction and female infertility.


Abdominal surgery is the most frequent cause of abdominal adhesions. Almost everyone who undergoes abdominal surgery develops adhesions; however, the risk is greater after operations on the lower abdomen and pelvis, including bowel and gynecological surgeries. Adhesions can become larger and tighter as time passes, causing problems years after surgery.
Surgery-induced causes of abdominal adhesions include
A less common cause of abdominal adhesions is inflammation from sources not related to surgery, including
Rarely, abdominal adhesions form without apparent cause.

            
            Readers Comments 38
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
tissue incisions, especially those involving internal organs
the handling of internal organs
the drying out of internal organs and tissues
contact of internal tissues with foreign materials, such as gauze, surgical gloves, and stitches
blood or blood clots that were not rinsed out during surgery
appendicitis - in particular, appendix rupture
radiation treatment for cancer
gynecological infections
abdominal infections
