
Three areas -- driving, homework, and alcohol/drugs -- are areas that may spark a fire between the parents of a teen with ADHD and their child. It is appropriate that parents anticipate and formulate a plan to address these issues with their adolescent.

Motor-vehicle accidents are the number-one cause of death in children 16-20 years of age.


ADHD is a disruption of neurocognitive functioning without a single cause. Current research is utilizing powerful neuroimaging techniques (for example, functional MRI) and has developed intriguing hypotheses of neurochemical dysfunction of the brain as a cause of ADHD behaviors. Regions of the brain felt to be responsible for executive functioning, problem solving, as well as goal seeking and impulsivity may function differently in those individuals with ADHD when compared to those without the diagnosis. Interestingly, regions of the brain not felt to be associated with ADHD behaviors may also be different when individuals with ADHD are compared to people not experiencing ADHD symptoms. While these theories may have interesting research implications, a more conventional approach utilizes both a mental-health evaluation and a thorough physical examination in determining the diagnosis of ADHD and providing a rational treatment program. There is clear evidence of a hereditary predisposition toward ADHD. Children with ADHD are more likely to have a parent or nonidentical twin sibling with the same diagnosis. An even higher likelihood exists when considering identical twins.


Primary to establishing a diagnosis of ADHD is the demonstration of symptoms detailed in the criteria of the DSM-V. Collecting information from both parents and teachers is crucial. Various rating scales (for example, Connors Scales) are objective and efficient to complete. Part of the evaluation for an individual for possible ADHD involves a thorough search for other associated (but not causative) mental health disorders including (but not limited to) learning disorders, mood disorders, and more. By definition, it is crucial to exclude other causes of the ADHD symptom complex. This umbrella may include
adverse effects of medication,
a medical problem (like hyperactive thyroid functioning),
mental deficiency, and
psychiatric disorders (for example, depression, anxiety, substance abuse, posttraumatic stress disorder).
