
The standard cataract surgical procedure is performed in a hospital or in an outpatient surgery center. There is no overnight stay at the facility. The most common form of cataract surgery today involves a process called phacoemulsification. After numbing the eye with drops or an injection, your surgeon, with the use of an operating microscope, will make a very small incision in the surface of the eye in or near the cornea. A thin ultrasound probe, which is often confused with a laser by patients, is inserted into the eye and uses high-ultrasonic vibrations to break up (phacoemulsify) the clouded lens. These tiny fragmented pieces are then suctioned out of the eye using the same ultrasound probe. Once the cataract is removed, an artificial lens is placed into the thin capsular bag that the cataract previously occupied. This lens is essential to help your eye focus after surgery.


Cataracts can be classified by anatomical location within the lens, degree of clouding of the lens, or by the cause of the cataract.
The lens of the human eye is shaped and sized similar to an M&M candy. It has a front (anterior) part and a back (posterior) part. The central portion of the lens is called the lens nucleus, and the outer portion is called the lens capsule. Between the inner nucleus and the outer capsule is a portion of the lens called the cortex. Clouding of the lens can occur only in the nucleus, in which case the term "nuclear cataract" or "nuclear sclerosis" is used. If the clouding occurs in the lens cortex only, the cataract is termed a "cortical cataract." If the loss of clarity of the lens is primarily in or adjacent to the capsule, the term "subcapsular cataract" is used. The location of the clouding can also be defined as being anterior or posterior, central, or peripheral. Often the clouding of the lens may affect multiple portions of the lens. The most common type of cataract that is related to age is sometimes termed a "senile cataract." This type of cataract primarily involves the nucleus of the lens. Cataracts that develop in the posterior subcapsular area (in the rear region of the lens capsule) are known as posterior subcapsular cataracts and are more common in younger age groups.
Any degree of loss of the normal transparency of the lens is called a cataract. The cloudier the lens, the more advanced the degree of cataract. A cataract may be mild, moderate, or severe. It may be early or advanced. If the lens is totally opaque it is termed a "mature" cataract. Any cataract that is not opaque is therefore termed an "immature" cataract. Most mature cataracts are white in color.


Advanced age is a significant risk factor for the development of cataracts. A family history for early development of cataracts, the presence of diabetes, tobacco use, and prolonged exposure to sunlight are also risk factors, as is trauma to the eye.
