

If you or someone you know has ingested a fish that you 
suspect might be contaminated with ciguatera toxin, and you or they have signs 
or symptoms, such as nausea, vomiting, pain, trouble breathing, seizure, 
 confusion, or abnormal skin color, call either an ambulance or the 
National Poison Control Center (1-800-222-1222) for guidance.  

The poison control center will instruct you what to do.

            
            Readers Comments 1
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
The National 
Poison Control Center phone number is 1-800-222-1222. This number is routed to 
the poison control center that serves your area.
Place the telephone number 
(along with police, fire, and 911 or equivalent) near your home phones. 
Do 
not induce vomiting or give syrup of Ipecac.
		Ipecac was formerly used to 
induce vomiting in poisoned patients where there was a chance to get the toxin 
out of the body. Several advisory bodies such as the American Association of 
		Poison Control Centers and the American Academy of Pediatrics have recommended 
that Ipecac NOT be used and that it should not even be kept in the household. 
For more information on this subject go to: 
http://www.poison.org/prepared/ipecac.asp 
	
	
Ipecac was formerly used to 
induce vomiting in poisoned patients where there was a chance to get the toxin 
out of the body. Several advisory bodies such as the American Association of 
		Poison Control Centers and the American Academy of Pediatrics have recommended 
that Ipecac NOT be used and that it should not even be kept in the household. 
For more information on this subject go to: 
http://www.poison.org/prepared/ipecac.asp 
Do not give activated charcoal 
at home. Allow medical personnel to decide if this treatment is appropriate.
	
Maintain hydration. 
Intravenous fluids may be necessary for uncontrollable nausea and vomiting. 
There is no specific antidote for ciguatera poisoning. 
Diphenhydramine 
(Benadryl) may help relieve itching. Give 25-50 mg every 6 hours. 
Alcohol, 
fish, nuts, and nut oils should be avoided after exposure to ciguatera poisoning 
because they may trigger recurrent symptoms. 
