Cyclospora infects the small intestine and usually causes watery diarrhea (sometimes described as explosive diarrhea) with frequent bowel movements. Other symptoms include loss of appetite, weight loss, bloating, increased gas, stomach cramps, nausea, vomiting, tiredness, muscle aches, and low-grade fever. Other infectious organisms can cause a similar illness, and these symptoms are not specific for Cyclospora infection. Some people infected with Cyclospora do not develop any symptoms. 
The time between becoming infected and developing symptoms is usually several days to a week, but some cases may take as long as two weeks to develop. If not treated, the illness may last for a few days to a month or longer. It may also return one or more times.


Cyclosporiasis is a diarrheal illness that occurs when humans accidentally ingest the Cyclospora cayetanensis parasite. This happens by drinking or eating uncooked items contaminated with soil or water.


Cyclospora cayetanensis was originally described as coccidian or Cyanobacterium-like because it resembled certain algae. In fact, it is a parasite that cycles between the environment (soil) and humans during its life cycle. It survives for long periods of time in nature as an oocyst. Cyclospora oocysts can resist extreme temperatures and the usual levels of chlorine in treated water. When temperatures warm, the oocyst matures and releases the infectious forms, called sporocysts. When sporocysts are ingested by a human, they invade the epithelial cells of the small intestine. They multiply in the cells and produce new oocysts. These are excreted in feces, starting the cycle all over again.


Cyclospora cayetanensis causes disease throughout the world, but it is commonest in tropical and subtropical climates. Outbreaks in cooler areas are often caused by food imported from warmer climates. Food is at risk if exposed to soil or water that is contaminated with human feces. Fresh produce like lettuce, raspberries, basil, and snow peas have caused past outbreaks. In 2013, an outbreak involved many states, including Texas, Iowa, and Nebraska. It affected hundreds of people and was at least partially caused by bagged lettuce grown in Mexico. There have been small outbreaks in 31 states with a total of 546 people diagnosed with the infection in 2015. Two large outbreaks occurred in 2018, one due to vegetables (packaged) by Del Monte and another by salads by McDonald's, resulting in their recall from about 3,000 locations. In 2018, the CDC documented over 300 cases of Cyclospora infection associated with bagged lettuce in 15 states.
Although travel to a tropical or subtropical country is a risk factor for Cyclospora infection, the risk is relatively low. Cyclospora is not a major cause of travelers' diarrhea.

            
            Share Your Story
        
