As children, most of us heard lots of health advice. Unfortunately, some of 
it, however well-intentioned, was medically incorrect. See if you've ever heard 
- or believed - any of these common summer health myths. 


According to WHO, "Drowning is the process of experiencing respiratory impairment from 
submersion/immersion in liquid." The possible outcomes of drowning are 
classified as death, morbidity (the development of disability or injury), and no 
morbidity. 
This simple definition was agreed upon at the 2002 World Congress 
of Drowning held in Amsterdam. Prior to that meeting, some definitions and 
classifications of drowning were not necessarily well defined, and their 
meanings were subject to a variety of interpretations by different countries and 
health organizations. While some people still try to sort drowning events into 
categories (for example wet vs. dry, primary vs. secondary, fatal vs. non-fatal), 
these terms may or may not adequately describe a patient's situation, the 
effects of drowning on their body, or the potential outcome. 


Drowning occurs when water comes into contact with the 
larynx (voice box). 

"Wait a half hour after eating before you can safely go swimming." This one seemed almost universally 
  accepted when I was a child and is still believed today. The myth involves the 
  possibility of suffering severe muscle cramping and  drowning from swimming on 
  a full stomach. While it's true that the digestive process does divert the 
  circulation of the blood toward the 
 gut and to a certain extent, away from the muscles, the fact is that an 
 episode of drowning caused by swimming on a full stomach has never been 
 documented....
Drowning is the third most common cause of accidental death worldwide, 
accounting for 7% of all injury related deaths. 
According to WHO, more than 350,000 people die every 
year from drowning. This number significantly underestimates the actual number 
because they do not include those who drown in floods, boating, or water 
transport accidents. 
Almost half of all drowning in the world occur in China and 
India.
The death rate from drowning does not reflect the potential morbidity 
(disability) due to brain injury for those who survive a drowning episode. 
Most 
countries do not keep non-fatal drowning statistics.

            
            Readers Comments 1
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
After an initial gasp, there is a period of voluntary breath holding. 
	
This is 
followed by spasm of the larynx and the development of hypoxemia (hypo=low + 
ox=oxygen + emia=blood), or decreased levels of oxygen in the bloodstream. 
Lack 
of oxygen causes aerobic metabolism to stop, and the body becomes acidotic. If 
not corrected quickly, the lack of oxygen in combination with too much acid may 
lead to problems with the electrical conduction system of the heart (cardiac 
arrest) and lack of blood supply to the brain. 
As body function declines, aspiration may occur as the larynx relaxes allowing water to enter the 
lungs. However, up to 20% of drowning victims have persistent spasm of the 
larynx, and no water is aspirated (this was formerly known as 
	"dry" drowning). 
