Getting your bell rung was once a badge of honor in sports. The ability to shake it off and not miss a play was accepted and routine. But it had been known for almost a hundred years that repeated hits to the head had long-term consequences and “dementia pugilista” was the term used for a punch drunk old fighter who had been hit in the head one too many times. The realization was slow in coming that the same injury to the brain could occur in football players, and that the most popular sport in the country could be a potential cause of psychiatric disturbances and early dementia.
A new term was born: Chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE) describes a gradual degeneration in brain function due to repeated head injuries that causes both concussions with symptoms and concussions that are asymptomatic (do not cause symptoms). Once the initial symptoms of concussion have faded, months and years later, new symptoms occur. CTE symptoms start slowly and creep up on the patient. Initially, there may be concentration and memory problems with episodes of disorientation and confusion, dizziness, and headache. It is as if the concussion symptoms were starting to return even without a new head injury.


The causes of encephalopathy are both numerous and varied.
Some examples of causes of encephalopathy include:
These examples do not cover all of the potential causes of encephalopathy but are listed to demonstrate the wide range of causes.
Although numerous causes of encephalopathy are known, the majority of cases arise from several major categories (some examples in parentheses):
Some drugs may cause encephalopathy; for example, posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES) may occur due to the use of drugs like tacrolimus and cyclosporine. This syndrome manifests with symptoms of headache, confusion, and seizures.
infectious (bacteria, viruses, parasites, or prions),
anoxic (lack of oxygen to the brain, including traumatic causes),
alcoholic (alcohol toxicity),
hepatic (for example, liver failure or liver cancer),
uremic (renal or kidney failure), 
metabolic diseases (hyper- or hypocalcemia, hypo- or hypernatremia, or hypo- or hyperglycemic),
brain tumors,
many types of toxic chemicals (mercury, lead, or ammonia),
alterations in pressure within the brain (often from bleeding, tumors, or abscesses), and 
poor nutrition (inadequate vitamin B1 intake or alcohol withdrawal).
infection (HIV, Neisseria meningitides, herpes, and hepatitis B and hepatitis C),
liver damage (alcohol and toxins),
brain anoxia or brain cell destruction (including trauma), and
kidney failure (uremic).
