Medical Author: Melissa Conrad Stöppler, MD
Medical Editor: William C. Shiel Jr., MD, FACP, FACR

			In May 2007, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention(CDC) 
issued an order to quarantine a man who flew on two transatlantic flights with a rare, dangerous form of tuberculosisand potentially exposed passengers and 
crew to the infection.
The Atlanta man was believed to be infected with the form of the tuberculosis bacteria known 
as "extensively drug-resistant" TB, abbreviated XDR TB. Tuberculosis is a 
bacterial infection that primarily affects the lungs, and the infection is 
spread via air droplets released during coughing, spitting, sneezing, or 
talking. XDR TB causes the same symptoms that a person would develop with TB. If TB disease is present, cough and feverwould be the predominant symptoms. XDR TB is a rare form of the disease that is resistant to the drugs 
routinely used to treat tuberculosis infections and is extremely difficult to 
treat. The few treatment options available for XDR TB are less effective and 
associated with worse outcomes than traditional antibiotic therapies for TB. In 
2006, there were two documented cases of XDR TB in the U.S. 
Health authorities were aware of the man's condition and had warned the man 
against traveling, but he stated that compelling personal reasons led him to fly 
from Atlanta to Paris on May 13. On May 24, he returned to North America on a 
flight from Prague to Montreal and entered the U.S. by car. While it is not 
certain that passengers and crew on board the flights were infected, the CDC 
recommended that passengers and crew on those flights be tested for TB 
infection. Particularly those seated within two rows of the infected man are at 
greatest risk for infection. 
After his return to the U.S., the man cooperated with authorities and 
voluntarily entered a hospital in Atlanta and was placed in respiratory 
isolation to prevent spread of the infection. This event marked the first time 
since 1963, when a patient with smallpox was quarantined, that the CDC 
issued this type of isolation order. 



Drug-resistant TB (MDR or XDR) is more 
common in people who: 


Avoid close contact or 
prolonged time with known TB patients in crowded, enclosed environments like 
clinics, hospitals, prisons, or homeless shelters. 



There is a vaccine for TB 
disease called Bacille Calmette-Guerin (BCG). It is used in some countries to 
prevent severe forms of TB in children. However, BCG is not generally 
recommended in the United States because it has limited effectiveness for 
preventing TB in adults. The effect of BCG against XDR TB would likely be 
similar to the effect on drug-susceptible TB. 



The most important thing is for you to continue taking all 
your TB medicines exactly as prescribed. No doses should be missed and treatment 
should not be stopped early. You should tell your health care provider if you 
are having trouble taking the medications. If you plan to travel, make sure you 
have enough medicine to last while away. 

            
            Readers Comments 1
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
Do not take their TB medicine regularly
Do not take all of their TB medicines 
as told by their doctor or nurse
Develop active TB disease again, after having 
taken TB medicine in the past
Come from areas of the world where drug-resistant 
TB is common
Have spent time with someone known to have drug-resistant TB 
disease
