GERD or acid reflux symptoms are caused by the regurgitation of acidic liquid stomach contents back up into the esophagus. 
The most common symptom of GERD is heartburn.
Other symptoms that can occur as a result of GERD include:


Gastroesophageal reflux disease, commonly referred to as GERD or acid reflux, 
is a condition in which the liquid content of the stomach regurgitates (backs up 
or refluxes) into the esophagus. The liquid can inflame and damage the lining (esophagitis) although visible signs of inflammation occur in a minority of patients. The regurgitated liquid usually contains acid and pepsin that are produced by the stomach. (Pepsin is an enzyme that begins the digestion of proteins in the stomach.) The refluxed liquid also may contain bile that has backed-up into the stomach from the duodenum. 
The first part of the small intestine attached to the stomach. Acid is believed to be the most injurious component of the refluxed liquid. Pepsin and bile also may injure the esophagus, but their role in the production of esophageal inflammation and damage is not as clear as the role of acid.

GERD is a chronic condition. Once it begins, it usually is life-long. If there is injury to the lining of the esophagus (esophagitis), this also is a chronic condition. Moreover, after the esophagus has healed with treatment and treatment is stopped, the injury will return in most patients within a few months. Once treatment for GERD is begun 
it will need to be continued indefinitely although. However, some patients with 
intermittent symptoms and no esophagitis can be treated only during symptomatic periods.

In fact, reflux of the stomach's liquid contents into the esophagus occurs in most normal individuals. One study found that reflux occurs as frequently in normal individuals as in patients with GERD. In patients with GERD, however, the refluxed liquid contains acid more often, and the acid remains in the esophagus longer.  It has also been found that liquid refluxes to a higher level in the esophagus in patients with GERD than normal individuals.

As is often the case, the body has ways to protect itself from
the harmful effects of reflux and acid. For example, most reflux occurs during
the day when individuals are upright. In the upright position, the refluxed
liquid is more likely to flow back down into the stomach due to the effect of
gravity. In addition, while individuals are awake, they repeatedly swallow,
whether or not there is reflux. Each swallow carries any refluxed liquid back
into the stomach. Finally, the salivary glands in the mouth produce saliva,
which contains bicarbonate. With each swallow, bicarbonate-containing saliva
travels down the esophagus. The bicarbonate neutralizes the small amount of acid
that remains in the esophagus after gravity and swallowing have removed most of
the acidic liquid.
Gravity, swallowing, and saliva are important protective mechanisms for the
esophagus, but they are effective only when individuals are in the upright
position. At night during sleep, gravity has no effect, swallowing stops,
and the secretion of saliva is reduced. Therefore, reflux that occurs at night
is more likely to result in acid remaining in the esophagus longer and causing
greater damage to the esophagus.
Certain conditions make a person susceptible to GERD. For example, GERD can
be a serious problem 
during pregnancy. The elevated hormone levels of pregnancy
probably cause reflux by lowering the pressure in the lower esophageal sphincter
(see below). At the same time, the growing fetus increases the pressure in the
abdomen. Both of these effects would be expected to increase reflux. Also,
patients with diseases that weaken the esophageal muscles, such as
 scleroderma or mixed connective tissue diseases, are more prone to develop GERD.



nausea, 
regurgitation, 
acid-induced erosions of the teeth, 
nausea,
chronic cough,
hoarseness,
laryngitis, and
ear pain.
