Typical symptoms of concussion include:


By definition, trauma is required to cause a head injury, but that trauma does not necessarily need to be violent. Falling down a few steps or falling into a hard object may be enough to cause damage. Motor vehicle crashes account for 
about 17% of traumatic brain injuries, while 35% are from falls. The majority of head injuries occur in males.
Penetrating head injuries describe those situations in which the injury occurs due to a projectile, for example a bullet, or when an object is impaled though the skull into the brain. 
Closed head injuries refer to injuries in which no lacerations are present. 
The brain may also be injured without a direct blow to the skull. The head sits on the neck allowing it to shake, causing the brain to slosh inside the skull and become injured.


The symptoms of head injury can vary from almost none to loss of consciousness and coma. As well, the symptoms may not necessarily occur immediately at the time of injury. While a brain injury occurs at the time of trauma, it may take time for enough swelling or bleeding to occur to cause symptoms that are recognizable.
Initial symptoms may include a change in mental status, meaning an alteration in the wakefulness of the patient. There may be loss of consciousness, lethargy, and confusion. 
Head injury symptoms may also include:
Other symptoms may be more subtle and include:
Late signs of significant head injury and raised pressure within the brain and skull include a dilated pupil, high blood pressure, low pulse rate, and abnormal breathing pattern.
Coma may be present if the patient doesn't awaken completely and is defined as a prolonged episode of loss of consciousness. There are different levels of coma and the Glasgow Coma Scale is one way of measuring its depth.
Headache
Difficulty concentrating or feeling “foggy”
Slower reaction times
Dizziness, lightheadedness
Nausea
Difficulty with bright lights or loud sounds
Irritability
Changes in sleep patterns, either insomnia or sleeping more

            
            Readers Comments 32
        

            
            Share Your Story
        

            
            Readers Comments 10
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
vomiting,
difficulty tolerating bright lights,
leaking cerebrospinal fluide from the ear or nose,
bleeding from the ear,
speech difficulty,
paralysis,
difficulty swallowing, and
numbness of the body.
nausea,
dizziness,
irritability,
difficulty concentrating and thinking, and
amnesia.
