The hepatitis B vaccine contains a protein (antigen) that stimulates the body 
to make protective antibodies. Examples of hepatitis B vaccines available in the 
United States include hepatitis b vaccine-injection (Engerix-B, Recombivax-HB). 
Three doses (given at 0, 1, and 6 months of age) are necessary to assure protection. 
There are also combination vaccines on the market that provide protection 
against hepatitis B and other diseases.
Other examples of the hepatitis B vaccine include:
Hepatitis B vaccines are effective and safe. Up to 95% of vaccinated 
individuals form effective antibodies when they get the vaccine and are 
protected from hepatitis B. In healthcare workers, high-risk public safety 
workers, dialysis patients, and sexual partners of infected persons, a blood 
test for antibodies is recommended after vaccination to ensure that the person 
produced antibodies. For the few who do not form antibodies, revaccination may 
improve response, especially in infants. However, a small proportion of 
individuals will never respond to hepatitis B vaccination. 


The term 'hepatitis' simply means inflammation of the liver. Hepatitis may be caused by a variety of viruses or other infections, medications, or a toxin such as alcohol. Hepatitis viruses that can cause injury to liver cells in addition to hepatitis B include the hepatitis A and hepatitis C viruses. These viruses are not related to each other or to the hepatitis B virus, and they differ in their structure, the ways they are spread among individuals, the severity of symptoms they can cause, the way they are treated, and the outcome of the infection. Other hepatitis viruses (hepatitis D, hepatitis E, and hepatitis G) cause disease much less commonly.
Other viruses that infect the liver but which are not specifically "hepatitis viruses" include Epstein-Barr virus (EBV, the virus that causes mononucleosis) and cytomegalovirus (CMV).
Hepatitis B is an infection of the liver caused by the hepatitis B virus (HBV).
In 2015, hepatitis B resulted in 887,000 deaths, mostly from complications (including cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma).
It is estimated that 257 million people are living with hepatitis B virus infection (defined as hepatitis B surface antigen positive). According to the Centers for Disease Control (CDC), approximately 19,000 new cases of hepatitis B occurred in the United States in 2016.
After a marked decline in acute hepatitis B virus (HBV) infections reported to CDC since the 1990s, due to the widespread introduction of hepatitis B vaccination, there has been no consistent trend in acute HBV cases since 2012; that is, reported cases have been fluctuating around 3,000 cases each year. In 2016, there were 3,218 cases reported to CDC. After adjusting for under-ascertainment and under-reporting, the estimated number of new HBV infections in 2016 was 20,900.
When a person first gets hepatitis B, they are said to have an 'acute' infection. Most people are able to eliminate the virus and are cured of the infection. Some are not able to clear the virus and have 'chronic' infection with hepatitis B that is usually life-long (see below). In the United States an estimated 2.2 million people are chronically infected with hepatitis B.
Hepatitis B is found throughout the world. Some countries have much higher rates of infection than the United States; for example, in Southeast Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa, as many as 10% to 30% of adults are chronically infected with hepatitis B.
The hepatitis B virus is a DNA virus, meaning that its genetic material is made up of deoxyribonucleic acids. It belongs to a family of viruses known as Hepadnaviridae. The virus is primarily found in the liver but is also present in the blood and certain body fluids.
Hepatitis B virus consists of a core particle (central portion) and a surrounding envelope (outer coat). The core is made up of DNA and the core antigen (HBcAg). The envelope contains the surface antigen (HBsAg). These antigens are present in the blood and are markers that are used in the diagnosis and evaluation of patients with suspected viral hepatitis.
The hepatitis B virus reproduces in liver cells, but the virus itself is not the direct cause of damage to the liver. Rather, the presence of the virus triggers an immune response from the body as the body tries to eliminate the virus and recover from the infection. This immune response causes inflammation and may seriously injure liver calls. Therefore, there is a balance between the protective and destructive effects of the immune response to the hepatitis B virus.
Hepatitis-b-hepatitis-a vaccine - injection (Twinrix), which provides 
protection against both hepatitis A and hepatitis B.
Haemophilus B/hepatitis B vaccine - injection (Comvax) provides protection 
against hepatitis B and Haemophilus influenzae type b (a cause of meningitis).
Pediarix provides protection against hepatitis B, tetanus, pertussis 
(whooping cough), and polio.

            
            Readers Comments 46
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
