In all heat-related illnesses, the symptoms appear when a person is exposed 
to extreme temperatures. The following checklist can help you recognize the 
symptoms of heat-related illnesses:


People suffer heat-related illness when the body's normal temperature control system is unable to effectively regulate its internal temperature. Normally, at high temperatures the body primarily cools itself through the evaporation of sweat. However, under certain conditions (air temperatures above 95 F/35 C high humidity), this cooling mechanism becomes less effective. When the humidity is high, sweat will not evaporate as quickly, preventing the body from releasing heat quickly. Furthermore, without adequate fluid intake, excessive fluid losses and electrolyte imbalances may also occur leading to dehydration. In such cases, a person's body temperature rises rapidly. Very high body temperatures can damage the brain and other vital organs.
Other conditions that can limit the ability to regulate body temperature include old age, obesity, fever, dehydration, heart disease, poor circulation, sunburn, and drug or alcohol use.


Those at greatest risk of heat-related illness include:
Infants and children up to four years of age are very sensitive to the effects of high temperatures and rely on others to regulate their environment and to provide adequate fluid intake. Moreover, they have a higher metabolic rate and inefficient sweating compared to adults.
People 65 years of age or older may not compensate for heat stress efficiently, and are less likely to sense and respond to changes in temperature. The elderly population also is at a higher risk because they usually have other pre-existing medical conditions, and they often take medications that can make them more vulnerable to dehydration (for example, diuretics).
Overweight individuals may be prone to heat-related illness because of their tendency to retain more body heat.
Any health condition that causes dehydration makes the body more susceptible to heat-related illness. If you or someone you know is at higher risk, it is important to drink plenty of fluids, avoid overexertion, and get your doctor or pharmacist's advice about medications being taken for:
Heat Rash: Heat rash looks like a red cluster of pimples or 
	small
	
	blisters. 
Heat cramps: Symptoms are painful muscle 
	spasms in the arms, legs, or abdomen
Heat syncope (fainting): Symptoms of heat syncope or fainting are 
Heat exhaustion is a warning that the body is getting too hot.
Heat stroke is a serious, life-threatening condition that occurs when the body loses its ability to control its temperature. 

            
            Readers Comments 1
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
infants and children up to four years of age,
people 65 years of age or older,
people who are overweight,
people who overexert during outdoor work or exercise,
people with mental illness, and
people who are chronically ill or on certain medications.
High blood pressure
Mental illness
Poor circulation
