Hypercalcemia is a condition in which blood calcium levels are elevated. The main cause of high calcium levels in the blood is 
hyperparathyroidism. Signs and symptoms of hypercalcemia involve the gastrointestinal tract 
(gut),  kidneys, bones, and mind, for example: 


A person with hyperparathyroidism may have severe symptoms, subtle ones, or none at all. Increasingly, routine blood tests that screen for a wide range of conditions, including high calcium levels, are alerting doctors to people who have mild forms of the disorder even though they are symptom-free.
When symptoms do appear, they are often mild and nonspecific, such as a feeling of weakness and fatigue, depression, or aches and pains. With more severe disease, a person may have
Patients may have thinning of the bones without symptoms, but with risk of fractures.
Increased calcium and phosphorus excretion in the urine may cause kidney stones.


Hyperparathyroidism is diagnosed when tests show that blood levels of calcium and parathyroid hormone are too high. Other diseases can cause high blood calcium levels, but only in hyperparathyroidism is the elevated calcium the result of too much parathyroid hormone. A blood test that accurately measures the amount of parathyroid hormone has simplified the diagnosis of hyperparathyroidism.
Once the diagnosis is established, other tests may be done to assess complications. Because high PTH levels can cause bones to weaken from calcium loss, a measurement of bone density can help assess bone loss and the risk of fractures. Abdominal images may reveal the presence of kidney stones and a 24-hour urine collection may provide information on kidney damage, the risk of stone formation, and the risk of familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia.


Surgery to remove the enlarged gland(s) (parathyroidectomy) is the main treatment for the disorder and cures it in 95 percent of operations, with low complication rates when performed by surgeons experienced with hyperparathyroidism.
The NIH panels recommended against the use of expensive imaging tests to locate benign tumors before initial surgery. Such tests are not likely to improve the success rate of surgery, which is about 95 percent when performed by experienced surgeons. Simple imaging tests before surgery are preferred by some surgeons. Localization tests are useful in patients having a second operation for recurrent or persistent hyperparathyroidism.


Calcimimetics are a new class of drug that turns off secretion of PTH. They have been approved by the Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of hyperparathyroidism secondary to kidney failure with dialysis, and primary hyperparathyroidism caused by parathyroid cancer. They have not been approved for primary hyperparathyroidism, but some physicians have begun prescribing calcimimetics for some patients with this condition. Patients can discuss this class of drug in more detail with their physicians.
Some patients who have mild disease may not need immediate treatment, according to panels convened by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) in 2002. Patients who are symptom-free, whose blood calcium is only slightly elevated, and whose kidneys and bones are normal may wish to talk with their physicians about long-term monitoring. In the 2002 recommendation, periodic monitoring would consist of clinical evaluation, measurement of serum calcium levels, and bone mass measurement. If the patient and physician choose long-term follow-up, the patient should try to drink lots of water, get plenty of exercise, and avoid certain diuretics, such as the thiazides. Immobilization (inability to move) and gastrointestinal illness with vomiting or diarrhea can cause calcium levels to rise. Patients with hyperparathyroidism should seek medical attention if they find themselves immobilized, vomiting, or having diarrhea.


Endocrinologists are doctors who specialize in hormonal problems. Nephrologists are doctors who specialize in kidney and mineral disorders. Along with surgeons who are experienced in endocrine surgery, endocrinologists and nephrologists are best qualified to treat people with hyperparathyroidism. Organizations that help people with hyperparathyroidism may have additional information to assist in finding a qualified health professional nearby.
Stomach ulcers 
Abdominal pain 
Nausea 
Kidney stones 
Frequent urination
Confusion 
Fractures 
Depression 
Memory Loss

            
            Readers Comments 31
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
a loss of appetite,
nausea,
vomiting,
constipation,
confusion or impaired thinking and memory, and
increased thirst and urination.

            
            Readers Comments 11
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
About 1% of patients undergoing surgery experience damage to the nerves controlling the vocal cords, which can affect speech.
One to 5% of patients lose all their parathyroid tissue and thus develop chronic low calcium levels, which may require treatment with calcium or vitamin D.
The complication rate is slightly higher for hyperplasia than it is for adenoma since more extensive surgery is needed.
