FODMAPs are in some foods and additives. The acronym stands for Fermentable Oligosaccharides, Disaccharides, Monosaccharides, and Polyols, which are short chain carbohydrates and sugar alcohols that aren't absorbed by the body very well. Foods high in FODMAPs can cause symptoms of bloating and abdominal pain.
Examples of foods that are high in FODMAPS that should be avoided if you have IBS include: 


The symptoms of IBS include abdominal pain or discomfort and changes in bowel habits. To meet the definition of IBS, the pain or discomfort should be associated with two of the following three symptoms:
Other symptoms of IBS may include:
Symptoms may often occur after eating a meal. To meet the definition of IBS, symptoms must occur at least once per week for at least 2 months.


The causes of IBS are not well understood. Researchers believe a combination of physical and mental health problems can lead to IBS. The possible causes of IBS in children include the following:
Some vegetables like onions, garlic, and broccoli 
Fruits that have pits or dried fruits 
Gluten products...

            
            Readers Comments 1
        

            
            Share Your Story
        

	Start with bowel movements that occur more or less often than usual

	Start with stool that appears looser and more watery or harder and more lumpy than usual

	Improve with a bowel movement

	
	Diarrhea - having loose, watery stools three or more times a day and feeling urgency to have a bowel movement

	
	Constipation - having hard, dry stools; two or fewer bowel movements in a week; or straining to have a bowel movement

	Feeling that a bowel movement is incomplete
Passing mucus, a clear liquid made by the intestines that coats and protects tissues in the GI tract

	Abdominal bloating

            
            Share Your Story
        
Brain-gut signal problems. Signals between the brain and nerves of the small and large intestines, also called the gut, control how the intestines work. Problems with brain-gut signals may cause IBS symptoms, such as changes in bowel habits and pain or discomfort.
GI motor problems. Normal motility, or movement, may not be present in the colon of a child who has IBS. Slow motility can lead to constipation and fast motility can lead to diarrhea. Spasms, or sudden strong muscle contractions that come and go, can cause abdominal pain. Some children with IBS also experience hyperreactivity, which is an excessive increase in contractions of the bowel in response to stress or eating.
Hypersensitivity. Children with IBS have greater sensitivity to abdominal pain than children without IBS. Affected children have been found to have different rectal tone and rectal motor response after eating a meal.
Mental health problems. IBS has been linked to mental health, or psychological, problems such as anxiety and depression in children.
Bacterial gastroenteritis. Some children who have bacterial gastroenteritis - an infection or irritation of the stomach and intestines caused by bacteria - develop IBS. Research has shown a connection between gastroenteritis and IBS in adults but not in children. But researchers believe postinfectious IBS does occur in children. Researchers do not know why gastroenteritis leads to IBS in some people and not others.
Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth (SIBO). Normally, few bacteria live in the small intestine. SIBO is an increase in the number of bacteria or a change in the type of bacteria in the small intestine. These bacteria can produce excess gas and may also cause diarrhea and weight loss. Some researchers believe that SIBO may lead to IBS, and some studies have shown antibiotics to be effective in treating IBS. However, the studies were weak and more research is needed to show a link between SIBO and IBS.
Genetics. Whether IBS has a genetic cause, meaning it runs in families, is unclear. Studies have shown that IBS is more common in people with family members who have a history of GI problems. However, the cause could be environmental or the result of heightened awareness of GI symptoms.
