Leigh's disease: A rare genetic disorder characterized by progressive damage to the central nervous system. Leigh's disease is caused by a defect in the function of mitochondria within the cells of the body. Symptoms begin in infancy and include poor sucking ability, the loss of head control and motor skills, loss of appetite, vomiting, irritability, continuous crying, and seizures. As the disorder progresses, symptoms may also include generalized weakness, lack of muscle tone, and episodes of lactic acidosis, which can lead to impairment of respiratory and kidney function.



There are different forms of Leigh's disease, but all forms have a poor prognosis. Most cases are fatal during childhood, although some individuals have survived to adolescence.


Also known as Leigh's syndrome.
SOURCE: MedTerms.com.



The most common treatment for Leigh's disease is thiamine or Vitamin B1. Oral sodium bicarbonate or sodium citrate may also be prescribed to manage lactic acidosis. Researchers are currently testing dichloroacetate to establish its effectiveness in treating lactic acidosis. In individuals who have the X-linked form of Leigh's disease, a high-fat, low-carbohydrate diet may be recommended.


There is also a form of Leigh's disease (called X-linked Leigh's disease) which is the result of mutations in a gene that produces another group of substances that are important for cell metabolism. This gene is only found on the X chromosome. 


The prognosis for individuals with Leigh's disease is poor. Individuals who lack mitochondrial complex IV activity and those with pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency tend to have the worst prognosis and die within a few years. Those with partial deficiencies have a better prognosis, and may live to be 6 or 7 years of age. Some have survived to their mid-teenage years.


The NINDS supports and encourages a broad range of basic and clinical research on neurogenetic disorders such as Leigh's disease. The goal of this research is to understand what causes these disorders and then to apply these findings to new ways to diagnose, treat, and prevent them.


NIH Patient Recruitment for Leigh's Disease Clinical Trials

            
            Readers Comments 2
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
At NIH Clinical Center
Throughout the U.S. and Worldwide
NINDS Clinical Research Collaboration Trials
