Meniere's disease does not have a cure yet, but your doctor might recommend 
some of the treatments below to help you cope with the condition.
SOURCE: National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders, 
National Institutes of Health. Meniere's Disease.


The diagnosis of Meniere's disease is primarily made from the history and physical examination. Tinnitus or ear fullness (aural fullness) need to be present to make the diagnosis An audiogram is helpful to show a hearing loss, and to rule-out other abnormalities. It is often helpful, if it can be done safely, to have an audiogram during or immediately following an attack of vertigo. This may show the characteristic low frequency hearing loss. As the disease progresses hearing loss usually worsens.
Other tests such as the auditory brain stem response (ABR), a computerized test of the hearing nerves and brain pathways, computer tomography (CT scan) or, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may be needed to rule out a tumor occurring on the hearing or balance nerve. These tumors are rare, but they can cause symptoms similar to Meniere's disease. A full neurological evaluation is performed to exclude other causes of vertigo.


Although there is no real cure for Meniere's disease, the attacks of vertigo can be controlled in nearly all cases. If you have vertigo without warning, you should not drive, because failure to control the vehicle may be hazardous to yourself and to others. Safety may require you to forego ladders, scaffolds, and swimming.
Medications. The most disabling symptom of an attack of Meniere's disease 
is dizziness. Prescription drugs such as meclizine, diazepam, glycopyrrolate, 
and lorazepam can help relieve dizziness and shorten the attack.
Salt restriction and diuretics. Limiting dietary salt and taking diuretics 
(water pills) help some people control dizziness by reducing the amount of fluid 
the body retains, which may help lower fluid volume and pressure in the inner 
ear.
Other dietary and behavioral changes. Some people claim that caffeine, 
chocolate, and alcohol make their symptoms worse and either avoid or limit them 
in their diet. Not smoking also may help lessen the symptoms.
Cognitive therapy. Cognitive therapy is a type of talk therapy that helps 
people focus on how they interpret and react to life experiences. Some people 
find that cognitive therapy helps them cope better with the unexpected nature of 
attacks and reduces their anxiety about future attacks.
Injections. Injecting the antibiotic gentamicin into the middle ear helps 
control vertigo but significantly raises the risk of hearing loss because 
gentamicin can damage the microscopic hair cells in the inner ear that help us 
hear. Some doctors inject a corticosteroid instead, which often helps reduce 
dizziness and has no risk of hearing loss. 

            
            Readers Comments 22
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
Medications: A diuretic (water pill) such as triamterene (Dyazide, Maxzide) combined with a low salt diet, is the primary treatment of Meniere's disease. Anti-vertigo medications such as meclizine (Antivert, Bonine, Meni-D, Antrizine) mask the symptoms, providing relief, or diazepam (Valium) may provide temporary relief during more severe attacks of vertigo. Anti-nausea medications [for example, promethazine (Phenergan)] sometimes also are prescribed. In some cases, steroids and certain antibiotic medications (gentamicin) injected into the middle ear may provide some relief from vertigo symptoms. Both anti-vertigo and anti-nausea medications may cause drowsiness. Because the nausea can be so severe at times, medications may be prescribed in the form of a suppository
Air pulse generator: in some patients, periodic delivery of small air pulses transmitted through a tube placed in the ear drum has had some variable success.
Surgery: If vertigo attacks are not controlled medically and are disabling, for a minority of patients, one of the following surgical procedures may be recommended depending on the individual patient's situation:endolymphatic shunt (A surgical procedure in which a shunt (tube) is placed in the endolymphatic sac that drains excess fluid from the ear.)selective vestibular neurectomylabyrinthectomy (surgical removal of the labyrinth of the ear) and eighth nerve section.
endolymphatic shunt (A surgical procedure in which a shunt (tube) is placed in the endolymphatic sac that drains excess fluid from the ear.)
selective vestibular neurectomy
labyrinthectomy (surgical removal of the labyrinth of the ear) and eighth nerve section.
