Metabolic syndrome is a group of risk factors that raises your risk for heart disease and other health problems, such as diabetesexternal link icon and stroke. These risk factors can increase your risk for health problems even if they're only moderately raised (borderline-high risk factors).


Most of the metabolic risk factors have no signs or symptoms, although a large waistline is a visible sign.


Some people may have symptoms of high blood sugar if diabetes - especially type 2 diabetes - is present. Symptoms of high blood sugar often include increased thirst; increased urination, especially at night; fatigue (tiredness); and blurred vision.


High blood pressure usually has no signs or symptoms. However, some people in the early stages of high blood pressure may have dull headaches, dizzy spells, or more nosebleeds than usual.
SOURCE: National Heart Lung and Blood Institute. What Are the Signs and Symptoms of Metabolic Syndrome?


Metabolic syndrome is quite common. Approximately 32% of the population in the U.S. has metabolic syndrome, 
and about 85% of those with type 2 diabetes have metabolic syndrome. Around 25% of adults in Europe and Latin America are estimated to have the condition, and rates are rising in developing East Asian countries. Within the US, Mexican Americans have the highest prevalence of metabolic syndrome. The prevalence of metabolic syndrome increases with age, and about 40% of people over 60 are affected. 


As is true with many medical conditions, genetics and the environment both play important roles in the development of the metabolic syndrome.
Genetic factors influence each individual component of the syndrome, and the syndrome itself. A family history that includes type 2 diabetes, hypertension, and early heart disease greatly increases the chance that an individual will develop the metabolic syndrome.
Environmental issues such as low activity level, sedentary lifestyle, and progressive weight gain also contribute significantly to the risk of developing the metabolic syndrome.
Metabolic syndrome is present in about 9% of people with normal body weight, 22% of those who are overweight and 60% of those considered obese. Adults who continue to gain five or more pounds per year raise their risk of developing metabolic syndrome by up to 45%.
While obesity itself is likely the greatest risk factor, others factors of concern include:
Post-menopausal women
Smoking
Eating an excessively high carbohydrate diet
Sedentary lifestyle
