Jaundice usually appears first on the face and then moves to the chest, belly, arms, and legs as bilirubin levels get higher. The whites of the eyes can also look yellow. Jaundice can be harder to see in babies with darker skin color. The baby's doctor or nurse can test how much bilirubin is in the baby's blood.


Neonatal jaundice may be associated with various symptoms, depending upon the degree of elevation in bilirubin levels as well as the exact cause of the jaundice. The yellow discoloration of the skin will begin on the face and forehead and extend toward the feet as the levels of bilirubin increase. This characteristic progression of jaundice in infants can sometimes allow your health care professional to estimate the bilirubin level based on the location and extent of the jaundice, though this assessment can often be inaccurate.
The signs and symptoms associated with neonatal jaundice may include the following:
Kernicterus, which is caused by prolonged excessively elevated levels of bilirubin affecting the central nervous system, must be recognized and promptly treated as it can lead to permanent brain damage. Kernicterus is an irreversible and chronic condition which can include cerebral palsy, hearing loss, and intellectual impairment. Kernicterus has likely started to develop if the infant begins to exhibit extreme lethargy, changes in muscle tone, and a high-pitched cry.


Jaundice is caused by the accumulation of bilirubin in the blood, typically from an increased production of bilirubin or a decreased ability to metabolize and excrete it. Bilirubin is formed when red blood cells break down and is normally metabolized in the liver and excreted in urine and feces.
Neonatal jaundice can be caused by several different conditions, and it is very commonly seen in newborns. The most common cause in newborns is physiologic jaundice, which affects most newborns and is usually benign. However, there are many other causes of neonatal jaundice that can be more serious, and require further medical evaluation and intervention. A newborn that develops jaundice within the first 24 hours of life requires immediate medical attention. The following are some of the causes of neonatal jaundice.
Yellow discoloration of the skin, mucous membranes and the whites of the eyes
Light-colored stool
Poor feeding
Lethargy/excessive sleepiness
Changes in muscle tone (either listless or stiff with arching of the back)
High-pitched crying
Seizures
