Ablation is used to treat abnormal heart rhythms, or arrhythmias. The type of arrhythmia and the presence of other heart disease will determine whether ablation can be performed surgically or non-surgically.
Non-surgical ablation, used for many types of arrhythmias, is performed in a special lab called the electrophysiology (EP) laboratory.


One of the most common symptom of PSVT is heart palpitations, often described as a "rapid heartbeat." There can also be a fullness in the throat that is associated with the rapid heartbeat.
Other symptoms include the following:
The symptoms of PSVT usually occur while the heart is beating quickly, but the fatigue can persist after the heartbeat returns to normal. By its nature, PSVT is intermittent and its onset cannot be predicted. As well, once the heart starts to beat quickly, there is no way of predicting if and when it will return to normal rhythm on its own. Some patients are unaware that their heart is beating quickly and PSVT is found only when the patient presents for care and is found to have a rapid heartbeat.


The diagnosis of PSVT is based upon interpretation of the heart rate monitor and electrocardiogram.
Sometimes the diagnosis is difficult because the rapid heart rate resolves before the patient presents for medical care. In these cases, where there is a recurrent pattern of palpitations, the healthcare professional may suggest monitoring the patient's heart rate and rhythm as an outpatient. A Holter monitor is a small device that can be worn for 24 or 48 hours that records every heartbeat and may give a clue as to the underlying cause of the palpitations. A 30-day event monitor may also be considered, which gives a longer window to detect the rhythm. Again, a small monitor is worn, but with this device the patient triggers the recording when the palpitations begin. In some cases, specialized electrophysiology tests may be necessary to monitor the heart and try to reproduce abnormal rhythms.
For infrequent events, an implantable device (LINQ) can be placed just under the skin, and can scan for a month looking for rare rhythm changes.
During this non-surgical procedure a catheter is inserted into a specific area of the heart.
A special machine directs energy through the catheter to small areas of the heart muscle that causes the abnormal heart rhythm.
This energy "disconnects" the pathway of the abnormal rhythm. It can also be used to disconnect the electrical pathway between the upper chambers (atria) and the lower chambers (ventricles) of the heart.

            
            Readers Comments 7
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
Lightheadedness,
Weakness and fatigue
Shortness of breath
Chest pressure
Syncope (passing out)

            
            Readers Comments 11
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
