Inflammation of the lining around the heart (the pericardium) that causes chest pain and accumulation of fluid around the heart (pericardial effusion). There are many causes of pericarditis, including infections, injury, radiation treatment, and chronic diseases.
SOURCE: 
MedTerms


Chest pain is the most common symptom of pericarditis.
Other symptoms may include fevers and chills, sweats, shortness of breath, and difficulty swallowing.
When pericarditis is due to infection, the symptoms tend to arise quickly while inflammation due to chronic diseases is more gradual in onset.


Pericarditis is usually from unknown causes (idiopathic). The cause may often be viral infections. Causes of pericarditis include:
Infections: 
Inflammatory diseases: 
Diseases that can cause generalized inflammation in other places within the body can also cause inflammation of the pericardium. Some examples include:
Metabolic illnesses:
Heart disease:
Other causes: 

            
            Readers Comments 25
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
Classically, the pain is begins in the center of the chest and radiates to the neck or upper back.
The pain is sharp and stabbing, but may also be felt as a dull, ache or burning pain.
The intensity may be mild or very severe and it can come on gradually or suddenly.
The pain makes it hurt to take a breath.
Most individuals feel worse when lying flat.

            
            Readers Comments 4
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
Viruses
Bacteria (like tuberculosis)
HIV (human immunodeficiency virus)
Rheumatoid arthritis
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
Scleroderma
Ankylosing spondylitis
Inflammatory bowel disease
Kidney failure and uremia
Hypothyroidism
Heart attack can cause direct irritation and inflammation of the pericardial lining.
Dressler's syndrome describes inflammation caused by an immune response to heart tissue damage from heart attack, open heart surgery, or a trauma.
Tumors
Radiation therapy
Medications
