A form of dementia characterized by a slowly progressive deterioration of social skills and changes in personality leading to impairment of intellect, memory, and language. 
The common core of symptoms includes loss of memory, lack of spontaneity, difficulty in thinking or concentrating, and disturbances of speech. Other symptoms include gradual emotional dullness, loss of moral judgment, and progressive dementia. The age of onset may range from 20 to 80 but is often between 40 and 60.
Pick disease is of unknown origin. The course ranges in duration from less than 2 years to more than 10 years. Death is usually caused by infection.

SOURCE: 
MedTerms


As it is defined today, the symptoms of frontotemporal dementia fall into two clinical patterns that involve either (1) changes in behavior, or (2) problems with language.
The first type features behavior that can be either impulsive (disinhibited) or bored and listless (apathetic) and includes
The second type primarily features symptoms of language disturbance, including difficulty making or understanding speech, often in conjunction with the behavioral type's symptoms.   Spatial skills and memory remain intact.  



There is a strong genetic component to the disease; frontotemporal dementia often runs in families. 



No treatment has been shown to slow the progression of frontotemporal dementia. Behavior modification may help control unacceptable or dangerous behaviors. Aggressive, agitated, or dangerous behaviors could require medication. Antidepressants have been shown to improve some symptoms. 


The outcome for people with frontotemporal dementia is poor.  The disease progresses steadily and often rapidly, ranging from less than 2 years in some individuals to more than 10 years in others.  Eventually some individuals with frontotemporal dementia will need 24-hour care and monitoring at home or in an institutionalized care setting.

            
            Readers Comments 5
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
inappropriate social behavior;
lack of social tact;
lack of empathy;
distractability;
loss of insight into the behaviors of oneself and others;
an increased interest in sex;
changes in food preferences;
agitation or, conversely, blunted emotions; 
neglect of personal hygiene; 
repetitive or compulsive behavior, and 
decreased energy and motivation.

            
            Readers Comments 4
        

            
            Share Your Story
        

            
            Readers Comments 1
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
