Pinworms are white, can be seen with the naked eye, and are about the length of a staple. At night, adult pinworms can sometimes be seen directly on the person's pajamas or around the anal area. The best time to look for pinworms is at night when the person wakes up due to itching in the anal/rectal. This sensation is likely caused by migrating female worms depositing eggs and irritating the skin. 

Pinworm is the most common parasitic worm infection in the United States, and the majority of pinworm infections worldwide occur in children, in temperate climates.
School-age children have the highest rates of pinworm infection. They are followed by preschoolers. Institutional settings including day care facilities often harbor multiple individuals (adults and children) with pinworm infections. Sometimes, nearly half of the children may be infected in a day-care facility.
Pinworm infection often occurs in more than one family member. Adults are less likely to have pinworm infection, except for mothers of infected children. However, adult sexual partners can transfer the eggs to each other. Pinworms also may infect the vagina and urethra.
If symptoms are present, they are similar in both children and adults. The signs and symptoms may include one or more of the following:
Less common symptoms include:
Many infected children and adults have few or no symptoms but, if the infection is heavy, the symptoms can be correspondingly more severe.

            
            Readers Comments 3
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
Intense (pruritus) around the anus and/or vagina
Discomfort in the anal and/or vaginal area
Rash or skin irritation around the anus or vagina
Insomnia or difficulty sleeping and/or restlessness due to irritation of skin
Pinworms often can be seen on the anal skin or in the stools, sometimes detected in the vagina and may produce some vaginal discharge
Abdominal pain
Secondary bacterial infections from intense skin scratching
Infrequent infection of the ureters and/or bladder may cause dysuria or bladder discomfort
