Medical Author: Benjamin C. Wedro, MD, FACEP, FAAEM 
Medical Editor: William C. Shiel Jr., MD, FACP, FACR
The concept of blood pressure is sometimes difficult to understand because it 
is usually described with numbers. However, adequate pressure within arteries is 
important to allow blood to be pumped throughout the body to deliver oxygen and 
other nutrients to areas of the body. This allows for normal metabolism and organ function. 
The blood pressure recording, measures pressures within the arteries at two 
different times. The first reading, the systolic pressure, measures the pressure 
when the heart is pumping blood to the body through the arteries. The second 
reading, the diastolic pressure, measures the pressure within the arteries when 
the heart is receiving blood returning from the body. 
There needs to be an underlying pressure within arterial blood vessels 
regardless of whether the heart is pumping or not. This intrinsic pressure is 
maintained by smooth muscle cells that surround all artery walls, great and 
small, and in effect squeeze and support the walls. Without this wall support, 
arteries would collapse in diastole (between each heart beat).
Blood pressure measurement is listed with two numbers with normal being less 
than 120/80, with 120 being the systolic blood pressure when the heart is 
pushing blood through the arterial system; and 80 being the diastolic blood 
pressure when the arteries are at rest and the heart is refilling.


The exact cause of preeclampsia and eclampsia is not fully understood, but it is believed to be a disorder of the lining of blood vessels. Abnormalities of the placenta have also been described. It likely arises due to a combination of factors, including both genetic and environmental influences. A number of genes have been studied as being potentially involved in preeclampsia, and there is an increased risk for women with affected family members. Nutritional factors, obesity, and the immune system may also play a role in its development although this is not yet fully understood. Some studies of the immune response in preeclampsia have shown problems in the way certain cells of the immune system interact with each other to regulate the immune response.


Different factors can increase a woman's risk for developing preeclampsia and 
eclampsia. These include:

            
            Readers Comments 7
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
Age: Teens or women over 40 are at 
greatest risk
History of preeclampsia/eclampsia in a 
previous pregnancy
Obesity
Having had high blood pressure prior to 
pregnancy
Pregnancy achieved through egg donation 
or donor insemination
Having a mother or sister who had 
preeclampsia
Having certain diseases, like diabetes, 
 lupus, rheumatoid arthritis, or some kidney diseases
Multiple gestation
Sickle cell disease
