Medical Author: Benjamin C. Wedro, MD, FACEP, FAAEM 
Medical Editor: William C. Shiel Jr., MD, FACP, FACR
The concept of blood pressure is sometimes difficult to understand because it 
is usually described with numbers. However, adequate pressure within arteries is 
important to allow blood to be pumped throughout the body to deliver oxygen and 
other nutrients to areas of the body. This allows for normal metabolism and organ function. 
The blood pressure recording, measures pressures within the arteries at two 
different times. The first reading, the systolic pressure, measures the pressure 
when the heart is pumping blood to the body through the arteries. The second 
reading, the diastolic pressure, measures the pressure within the arteries when 
the heart is receiving blood returning from the body. 
There needs to be an underlying pressure within arterial blood vessels 
regardless of whether the heart is pumping or not. This intrinsic pressure is 
maintained by smooth muscle cells that surround all artery walls, great and 
small, and in effect squeeze and support the walls. Without this wall support, 
arteries would collapse in diastole (between each heart beat).
Blood pressure measurement is listed with two numbers with normal being less 
than 120/80, with 120 being the systolic blood pressure when the heart is 
pushing blood through the arterial system; and 80 being the diastolic blood 
pressure when the arteries are at rest and the heart is refilling.


Blood pressure is the amount of force exerted by the blood against the walls of the arteries. A person's blood pressure is considered high when the readings are greater than 140 mm Hg systolic (the top number in the blood pressure reading) or 90 mm Hg diastolic (the bottom number). In general, high blood pressure, or hypertension, contributes to the development of coronary heart disease, stroke, heart failure and kidney disease.


Although many pregnant women with high blood pressure have healthy babies without serious problems, high blood pressure can be dangerous for both the mother and the fetus. Women with pre-existing, or chronic, high blood pressure are more likely to have certain complications during pregnancy than those with normal blood pressure. However, some women develop high blood pressure while they are pregnant (often called gestational hypertension).


The effects of high blood pressure range from mild to severe. High blood pressure can harm the mother's kidneys and other organs, and it can cause low birth weight and early delivery. In the most serious cases, the mother develops preeclampsia - or "toxemia of pregnancy"--which can threaten the lives of both the mother and the fetus.


Preeclampsia is a condition that typically starts after the 20th week of pregnancy and is related to increased blood pressure and protein in the mother's urine (as a result of kidney problems). Preeclampsia affects the placenta, and it can affect the mother's kidney, liver, and brain. When preeclampsia causes 
seizures, the condition is known as eclampsia--the second leading cause of maternal death in the U.S. Preeclampsia is also a leading cause of fetal complications, which include low birth weight, premature birth, and stillbirth.


There is no proven way to prevent preeclampsia. Most women who develop signs of preeclampsia, however, are closely monitored to lessen or avoid related problems. The only way to "cure" preeclampsia is to deliver the baby.


            
            Readers Comments 1
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
