Medical Author: Benjamin C. Wedro, MD, FAAEM
Medical Editor: Melissa Conrad Stöppler, MD
The pressure to manufacture and distribute the H1N1 vaccine before the 
H1N1 (swine) influenza virusbegins its autumn spread is ongoing, but so far it seems that 
the virus may be winning. The race, though, is far from over, but in more than 
40 states, the number of people being diagnosed clinically with the "swine" flu 
is growing.
"Clinically" is the key word, since testing for the influenza virus is no 
longer recommended. Instead, health care practitioners are using history as the 
guide to whether H1N1 is the likely diagnosis. The most frequent symptoms are 
 fever, cough, shortness of breath, and fatigue. These are pretty non-specific 
complaints, but in today's setting of widespread influenza it is enough to be 
relatively certain that influenza is the cause? Less commonly, there may be 
 chills, muscle aches, runny nose, sore throat, and headache. Interestingly, H1N1 
also may present with vomitingand 
diarrhea, two symptoms that tend not to be 
associated with the usual influenza pattern.


These questions and answers have been updated to include new information on 
2009 H1N1 flu in pregnant women. Both seasonal and 2009 H1N1 flu viruses will 
circulate during the 2009-2010 flu season. A pregnant woman who thinks she has 
the flu should call her doctor right away to see if treatment with an antiviral 
medicine is needed. The medicine is most helpful if it is started soon after the 
pregnant woman becomes sick. The latest advice for getting seasonal and 2009 
H1N1 vaccines during pregnancy is also included.


Call your doctor right away if you have 
flu symptoms or if you have close 
contact with someone who has the flu. Pregnant women who get sick with 2009 H1N1 
can have serious health problems. They can get sicker than other people who get 
2009 H1N1 flu. Some pregnant women sick with 
2009 H1N1 have had 
early labor and 
severe pneumonia. Some have died. If you are pregnant and have symptoms of the 
flu, take it very seriously. Call your doctor right away for advice.


Getting a flu shot is the single best way to protect against the flu. Talk 
with your doctor about getting a seasonal flu shot and the 2009 H1N1 flu shot. 
You will need both flu shots this year to be fully protected against flu. You 
should get both shots as soon as they are available to protect you and your 
baby. The seasonal flu shot has been shown to protect both the mother and her 
baby (up to 6 months old) from flu-like illness.
Talk with your doctor right away if you have close contact with someone who 
has 2009 H1N1 flu. You might need to take medicine to reduce your chances of 
getting the flu. Your doctor may prescribe 
Tamiflu® or 
Relenza® to help prevent 
2009 H1N1 flu. To prevent flu, you would take a lower dose of the antiviral 
medicine for 10 days.
