

Priapism results in a persistent erection. Priapism is usually divided into three categories.


The diagnosis of priapism is based on history (asking the patient questions) and the 
physical exam of the genitalia. Once a health care professional has finished this 
part of the exam a few other tests might be ordered.


The treatment of ischemic priapism includes several modalities and will depend on how long the priapism has been present, and the results of the blood tests. These interventions are performed in a step wise fashion with surgery being the last resort. Unfortunately, some of the treatments of priapism can lead to erectile dysfunction in the future.
Treatments for priapism are as follows:
Ice to the area around the genitals is sometime utilized. In severe cases surgical procedures are available.
Non-ischemic priapism is usually not an emergency and will frequently resolve without interventions.

            
            Share Your Story
        
Ischemic priapism is the most common category of priapism. Blood is not able to leave the penis causing the erection. This painful event is considered an emergency if it lasts for more than 4 hours.
Non-ischemic (high-flow) priapism is the second category of priapism, and much less common. In this form, too much blood flows into the penis. The erection tends to be painless and less rigid then the ischemic form.
Suttering priapism is the third category of priapism. In stuttering priapism, the erection occurs repeatedly but is transient in nature.
Measurement of blood gas: By inserting a small needle and removing blood from 
	the penis the doctor will be able to establish the oxygen content and therefore 
the type of priapism the patient has.
Blood tests: Measuring white and red blood cells and platelets will help 
the health care professional determine why the patient might have a priapism.

            
            Readers Comments 1
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
Aspiration: Blood is drained from the penis using a 16 or 18 gauge needle and syringe.
Medication: A medication that constricts blood vessels that carry blood into the penis (Alpha Adrenergic Sympathomimetic; phenylephrine) is injected into the penis using a small (29 gauge) needle into the corpora cavernosa area of the penis.
Surgery: A surgical procedure that reroutes blood can be performed.
