By Camille PeriWebMD Feature
Reviewed by Brunilda Nazario, MD
With more and more of us getting less and less sleep, it's tempting to reach 
for a Red Bull or an espresso when we feel sleepy at work. But consuming 
caffeine to combat sleepiness can lead to a vicious cycle.
The java jolt that helps you stay awake can take up to eight hours to wear 
off. Caffeine can also reduce your sleep time, alter the normal stages of sleep, 
and decrease the quality of your sleep.
How can you stay awake naturally? Try some of these 12 jitter-free tips to 
take the edge off sleepiness.
1. Get Up and Move Around to Feel Awake
In one well-known study, Robert Thayer, PhD, a professor at California State 
University, Long Beach, studied whether people were more energized by eating a 
candy bar or taking a brisk 10-minute walk. Though the candy bar provided a 
quick energy boost, participants were actually more tired and had less energy an 
hour later. The 10-minute walk increased energy for two hours. That's because 
walking pumps oxygen through your veins, brain, and muscles.
If you work at a desk, get up frequently for short walks. At meal breaks, 
walk to a restaurant or, if you bring your lunch, head for a nice spot to eat 
it. Whether you take a walk outside or just in the building where you work, it 
will make you feel more alert and refreshed....


Sleepiness can be due to the body's natural daily sleep-wake cycles, 
inadequate sleep, sleep disorders, or certain drugs.


Each day there are two periods when the body experiences a natural tendency 
toward sleepiness; during the late night hours (generally between midnight and 7 
a.m.) and again during the midafternoon (generally between 1 p.m. and 4 p.m.). 
If people are awake during these times, they have a higher risk of falling 
asleep unintentionally, especially if they haven't been getting enough sleep.


The amount of sleep needed each night varies among people. Each person needs 
a particular amount of sleep in order to be fully alert throughout the day. 
Research has shown that when healthy adults are allowed to sleep unrestricted, 
the average time slept is 8 to 8.5 hours. Some people need more than that to 
avoid problem sleepiness; others need less.
If a person does not get enough sleep, even on one night, a "sleep debt" 
begins to build and increases until enough sleep is obtained. Problem sleepiness 
occurs as the debt accumulates. Many people do not get enough sleep during the 
work week and then sleep longer on the weekends or days off to reduce their 
sleep debt. If too much sleep has been lost, sleeping in on the weekend may not 
completely reverse the effects of not getting enough sleep during the week.


Sleep disorders such as sleep apnea, narcolepsy, 
restless legs syndrome, and insomnia can cause problem sleepiness. 
Sleep apnea is a serious disorder in which a person's 
breathing is interrupted during sleep, causing the 
individual to awaken many times during the night and experience problem 
sleepiness during the day. People with 
narcolepsy have excessive 
sleepiness during the day, even after sleeping enough at night. They may fall 
asleep at inappropriate times and places. 
Restless legs syndrome (RLS) 
causes a person to experience unpleasant sensations in the legs, often described 
as creeping, crawling, pulling, or painful. These sensations frequently occur in 
the evening, making it difficult for people with RLS to fall asleep, leading to 
problem sleepiness during the day. 
Insomnia is the perception of 
poor-quality sleep due to difficulty falling asleep, waking up during the night 
with difficulty returning to sleep, waking up too early in the morning, or 
unrefreshing sleep. Any of these sleep disorders can cause problem sleepiness. 
