

Although there is no specific diagnostic test for the illness, it is understood that since it is a form of depression, the symptoms of the condition include tiredness, fatigue, sadness or a sense of general discontent, crying spells, irritability, apathy, trouble concentrating, body aches, loss of sex drive, poor sleep, decreased activity level, and appetite changes, particularly overeating, especially of carbohydrates and weight gain. When the condition occurs during the summer, the symptoms are more commonly insomnia, poor appetite, and weight loss, in addition to anxiety, irritability, difficulty concentrating, and crying spells. Social isolation, with the potential resulting loneliness, also occurs at times with summer seasonal affective disorder. If the condition is severe, it can be associated with thoughts of suicide.
The symptoms of seasonal affective disorder typically tend to begin in the fall each year, lasting until spring. The symptoms are more intense during the darkest months. Therefore, the more common months for the condition to occur will vary depending on how far away from the equator one lives.


Seasonal affective disorder seems to develop from inadequate exposure to bright light during the winter months. Studies show that bright light changes the chemicals in the brain. Exactly how this occurs and the details of its effects are being studied. Factors like high levels of melatonin and low levels of serotonin in the brain, as well as low levels of vitamin D levels in the blood are found to be associated with a higher occurrence of seasonal affective disorder and some other depressive conditions.


A number of different health professionals can be qualified to evaluate and treat seasonal affective disorder, including primary-care providers, psychiatrists, clinical psychologists, psychiatric nurses, social workers, physician assistants, and nurse practitioners.
Many factors, including unrealistic expectations, financial pressures, and excessive commitments can cause stress and anxiety at holiday time.

Certain people may feel anxious or depressed around the winter holidays due to seasonal affective disorder (SAD), sometimes referred to as seasonal depression.

Headaches, excessive drinking, overeating, and insomnia are some of the possible consequences of poorly managed holiday stress.

Those suffering from any type of holiday anxiety, depression, or stress can benefit from increased social support during this time of year. Counseling or support groups can also be beneficial.

            
            Readers Comments 10
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
