Medical Author: Melissa Conrad Stöppler, MD
Medical Editor: Jay W. Marks, MD
Most of our lives are filled with family, work, and 
community obligations, and at some point we feel as though we are "running on 
empty." Here are eight immediate stressbusters to help "fill up the tank!" So take deep relaxing breath and read on.


Stress comes in all forms and affects people of all ages and all walks of life. No external standards can be applied to predict stress levels in individuals -- one need not have a traditionally stressful job to experience workplace stress, just as a parent of one child may experience more stress related to parenting than a parent of several children. The degree of stress in our lives is highly dependent upon individual factors such as our physical health, the quality of our interpersonal relationships, the number of commitments and responsibilities we carry, the degree of others' dependence upon and expectations of us, the amount of support we receive from others, and the number of changes or traumatic events that have recently occurred in our lives.
 However, certain factors can enhance our susceptibility to stress or act to reduce its severity. People with strong social support networks (consisting of family, friends, religious organizations, or other social groups) report less stress and overall improved mental health in comparison to those without these social contacts. People who are poorly nourished, who get inadequate sleep, or who are physically unwell also have reduced capabilities to handle the pressures and stresses of everyday life and may report higher stress levels. Some stressors are particularly associated with certain age groups or life stages. Children, teens, college students, working parents, and seniors are examples of the groups who often face common stressors related to life transitions.
People who are providing care for elderly or infirm loved ones may also experience a great deal of stress as caregivers. Having a loved one or family member who is under a great deal of stress often increases our own stress levels as well.
Watch for the next instance in which you find yourself becoming annoyed or 
 angryat something trivial or unimportant. Then practice letting go, making a 
conscious choice not to become angry or upset. Do not allow yourself to waste 
thought and energy where it isn't deserved. Effective angermanagement is a 
tried-and-true stress reducer.
Breathe slowly and deeply. Before reacting to the next stressful 
occurrence, take three deep breaths and release them slowly. If you have a few 
minutes, try out a relaxation techniquesuch as 
 meditationor guided imagery. 
 
Whenever you feel overwhelmed by stress, practice speaking more slowly 
than usual. You'll find 
  that you think more clearly and react more reasonably to stressful situations. 
  Stressed people tend to speak fast and breathlessly; by slowing down your 
  speech you'll also appear less anxious and more in control of 
any situation. 
Jump-start an effective time management strategy. Choose one simple thing 
you have been putting off (e.g., returning a phone call, making a doctor's 
appointment), and do it immediately. Just taking care of one nagging 
responsibility can be energizing and can improve your attitude. 

            
            Share Your Story
        
