Swelling of the feet and ankles can occur as a result of conditions involving the local extremities as well as diseases and conditions that affect the entire body. 
Examples of causes of swelling of only one ankle or foot are sprains and 
strains. Sometimes diseases that affect the entire body, such as heart disease and kidney or liver failure, can result in excess fluid buildup (edema) that is often concentrated in the legs and feet, leading to swelling not only of the ankles but also of the feet and lower legs. This can also occur with pregnancy. 
The symptoms of swollen feet and swollen ankles depend on the underlying causes mentioned above.

            
            Readers Comments 4
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
In general, swelling caused by dependent edema, pregnancy, medications, and most diseases produce swelling that is bilateral (present in both feet or ankles ) and usually begins as a soft, puffy skin enlargement in the feet that spreads rapidly (often within hours) to the ankles.
The skin is easily indented when pressed down with a finger and slowly returns to its more puffy state when the finger pressure is removed.
Indentations seen in the puffy skin when shoes or socks are removed are classic signs of swelling.
The skin color with this swelling is often normal or slightly pale; indentation marks are slightly darker than the surrounding swollen tissue.
Many individuals can simply position themselves on their backs, elevate their feet and ankles higher than their hearts, and after some time (often a few hours), the swelling may resolve completely. However, in some chronic diseases and with some medications taken for long time periods, the swelling becomes chronic and the skin becomes more rigid, reddish and sometimes mildly discolored or mottled and will not return to normal after a few hours of elevation. For example, many people with chronic congestive heart failure (CHF) will have chronic bilateral swelling of feet and ankles with skin changes.
