Together with other abnormal ear noises, ear ringing is medically called tinnitus. 
People with tinnitus perceive sounds when no sound is present like:


Tinnitus is a symptom, not a disease, and it has a variety of causes that may arise anywhere in the hearing mechanism. It begins in the ear with the tympanic membrane and the cochlea, where sound is transmitted 
and transformed into electrical energy for the brain to perceive.


buzzing, 
roaring, and 
pulsating sounds.

            
            Read Doctor's View
        

            
            Readers Comments 79
        

            
            Share Your Story
        

	Blood flow and/or tumors: Tinnitus that is throbbing (pulsatile) may be due to blood flow through arteries and veins adjacent to the ear, as well as tumors that are vascular, 
	meaning that they have increased blood flow within them.
Muscle 
	spasms: Tinnitus that is described as clicking may be due to abnormalities that cause the muscle in the roof of the mouth (palate) to go into spasm. This causes the Eustachian tube, which helps equalize pressure in the ears, to repeatedly open and close. Multiple sclerosis and other neurologic diseases that are associated with muscle spasms may also be a cause of tinnitus, as they may lead to spasms of certain muscles in the middle ear that can cause the repetitive clicking.
Temporomandibular 
	joint (TMJ) abnormalities may cause a repeated clicking sound in the ear.

	Damage to the vestibulocochlear nerve: Damage to the vestibulocochlear nerve responsible for transmitting sound from the ear to the brain may cause tinnitus. 
	Causes may include drug toxicity or a tumor (for example, acoustic neuroma).
Meniere's disease, which is associated with hearing loss and vertigo 
	also may cause tinnitus.
Aging: As people age, their hearing may decrease and there can be associated tinnitus.
Otosclerosis: 
	Otosclerosis, which is caused by abnormal bone growth in the middle ear, can sometimes cause tinnitus.
Trauma may also be a cause of tinnitus and hearing loss. This includes barotrauma, whereby air pressure changes can damage ear function. Examples of barotrauma include pressure changes from scuba diving or changes in air pressure when flying.
