Medical Author: 

Melissa Conrad Stöppler, MDMedical Editor: 

Charles P. Davis, MD, PhD
Travelers' diarrhea strikes up to half of all international travelers. It is 
far and away the most common travel-related illness, affecting about 10 million 
people per year worldwide. Infectious agents, particularly bacteria from water 
contaminated with feces, cause travelers'
diarrhea. The most commonly identified bacteria associated with travelers' 
diarrhea are what are called ETEC, or enterotoxigenic 
Escherichia coli.
The destination is the most important risk factor for the development of 
travelers' diarrhea. Developing countries all over the world represent the 
highest risk, and the highest-risk destinations are the developing countries of 
Latin America, Africa, the Middle East, and Asia. Certain groups of people are 
also more likely to develop travelers' diarrhea. At-risk groups include:


Travelers' diarrhea usually is contracted by the ingestion of contaminated food or water. Contrary to common belief, food - not water - is the primary cause. The CDC estimates up to 80% of cases of travelers' diarrhea are caused by bacteria. The most common bacterium that causes travelers' diarrhea is enterotoxigenic E. coli, one of six classes of enterovirulent E. coli.
Most E. coli are harmless. However, there are six unique classes of E. coli that can cause inflammation of the stomach and bowels (gastroenteritis) and are termed enterovirulent. They are virulent (extremely noxious) to the intestine (or, in Greek, the enteron).
Collectively, these six classes of enterovirulent E. coli are referred to as the EEC group (enterovirulent E. coli). Each class of EEC is distinct and different from the others.
Other bacterial species implicated in travelers' diarrhea include Campylobacter jejuni, Shigella, and  Salmonella. Viruses (including Rotavirus, Norwalk virus and other enteric viruses) less commonly are causes of travelers' diarrhea. Parasitic infections are an uncommon cause with the exception of  Giardia lamblia, which should be suspected in individuals traveling to Russia or to mountainous regions of the Northern Hemisphere. Cryptosporidum, another parasite, also has been implicated as a common cause of diarrhea in visitors to St. Petersburg, Russia and elsewhere.
immunosuppressed persons, 
those with diabetes, and 
	
persons with inflammatory 
bowel diseases. 
Enteroinvasive E. coli (EIEC) invades (passes into) the intestinal wall to produce severe diarrhea.
Enterohemorrhagic E. coli (EHEC) is a type of EHEC, E.coli 0157:H7 that can cause bloody diarrhea and the hemolytic uremic syndrome (anemia and kidney failure).
Enterotoxigenic E. coli (ETEC) is the one that causes most of travelers' diarrhea, and produces a toxin that acts on the intestinal lining.
Enteropathogenic E. coli (EPEC) can cause diarrhea outbreaks in newborn nurseries.
Enteroinvasive E. coli (EIEC) invade the epithelial cells causing diarrhea with mucus and blood.
Enteroaggregative E. coli (EAggEC) can cause acute and chronic (long lasting) diarrhea in children.
