

Symptoms of trigeminal neuralgia include an acute onset of sharp, stabbing 
pain to one side of the face. It tends to begin at the angle of the jaw and 
radiate along the junction lines; between the ophthalmic branchV1 and maxillary 
branch V2, or the maxillary branch V2 and the mandibular branch V3.
The pain is severe and described as an electric shock. It may be made worse 
by light touch, chewing, or cold exposure in the mouth. In the midst of an 
attack, affected individuals shield their face trying to protect it from being touched. This 
is an important diagnostic sign because with many other pain syndromes like a 
 toothache, the 
person will rub or hold the face to ease the pain.
While there may be only one attack of pain, the person may experience 
recurrent sharp pain every few hours or every few seconds. Between the attacks, 
the pain resolves completely and the the person has no symptoms. However, because 
of fear that the intense pain might return, people can be quite distraught. 
Trigeminal neuralgia tends not to occur when the person is asleep, and this 
differentiates it from migraines, which often waken the 
person.
After the first episode of attacks, the pain may subside for months or years 
but there is always the risk that trigeminal neuralgia will recur without 
warning.


Idiopathic trigeminal neuralgia is a clinical diagnosis and often no testing 
is required after the health care professional takes a history of the situation 
and performs a physical examination which should be normal.
It is important to remember that the neurologic exam must be normal. There 
are two specific areas to test. There can be no muscle weakness; V3 is 
responsible for chewing and there can be no jaw or facial weakness found. The corneal reflex controlled by V1 must be present. When the cornea or 
covering of the eye is touched, the eye blinks in response. If these two 
findings are not normal, the search should begin for an inflammatory or 
compression cause of the trigeminal nerve. Some clinicians may order an MRI to 
help diagnose other conditions that may cause trigeminal neuralgia.
The International Headache Society has established criteria for making the 
diagnosis and includes the following:

            
            Readers Comments 15
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
Paroxysmal attacks of pain lasting from a fraction of a second to 2 
minutes, affecting 1 or more divisions of the trigeminal nerve and fulfilling 
criteria B and C.
Pain has at least one of the following characteristics: (1) 
intense, sharp, superficial or stabbing; or (2) precipitated from trigger areas 
or by trigger factors 
Attacks stereotyped in the individual patient 
No 
clinically evident neurologic deficit 
Not attributed to another disorder
