Treatments for ulcerative colitis includes both medications and surgery; 
however, there is no medication that can cure ulcerative colitis. Medications 
that treat ulcerative colitis are
Treatment of ulcerative colitis with medications is similar, though not always identical, to treatment of Crohn's disease.


A person with ulcerative colitis may find they need to modify their diet to 
help manage their symptoms. There is not a single diet or meal plan that fits 
everyone with ulcerative colitis, and diets are individualized for each patient. Depending on 
symptoms different types of diets may be recommended, such as:
Attention to nutrition is important for patients with ulcerative colitis, as 
the symptoms of diarrhea and bleeding can lead to dehydration, electrolyte 
imbalance, and loss of nutrients. It may be necessary to take 
nutritional supplements if your symptoms do not allow you to eat a nutritionally balanced 
diet. Talk to your health-care professional about what supplements to take. Many people with 
ulcerative colitis find it easiest to eat smaller, more frequent meals rather 
than a few large ones. This can also help increase the nutrition absorbed from 
the foods you eat. 
anti-inflammatory agents, for example, 5-ASA compounds like sulfasalazine 
(Azulfidine), and olsalazine (Dipentum), and topical and systemic 
corticosteroids), and
immunomodulators, for example, 6-mercaptopurine (6-MP), azathioprine (Imuran), methotrexate (Rheumatrex, Trexall), cyclosporine (Gengraf, Neoral).
A high-calorie diet: Many people with ulcerative colitis lose weight and can 
develop signs of malnutrition. A high calorie diet may prevent these problems. 
	
A 
lactose-free diet: People with ulcerative colitis may also have lactose intolerance. 
A low-fat 
diet: Ulcerative colitis may interfere with fat absorption and eating fatty 
foods may trigger symptoms. This is often recommended during an ulcerative 
	colitis flare. 
A 
low-fiber diet  (low-residue 
	diet): This can help reduce the frequency of bowel movements and 
abdominal cramps. 
A low-salt diet: This diet is used when patients are on 
corticosteroid therapy to help reduce water retention. 
A low FODMAP diet: FODMAP 
stands for Fermentable Oligo-Di-Monosaccha-rides and Polyols, which are types of 
sugars found in certain carbohydrates and sugar alcohols. This diet is used in 
people who have intolerance to FODMAPS. 
A gluten-free diet: 
	People with ulcerative colitis may 
also be sensitive to gluten. 
