Medical Author: Benjamin C. Wedro, MD, 
FACEP, FAAEM
Medical Editor: William C. Shiel, Jr., MD, FACP, FACR
The anatomy of the ear can be a little confusing, especially since the ear is 
responsible not only for hearing, but also for balance.
There are three components to the ear: the outer ear, the middle ear and the 
inner ear. All three are involved in hearing but only the inner ear is 
responsible for balance.
The outer ear is composed of the pinna, or ear lobe, and the external 
auditory canal. Both structures funnel sound waves towards the ear drum or 
tympanic membrane allowing it to vibrate. The pinna is also responsible for 
protecting the ear drum from damage. Modified sweat glands in the ear canal form 
ear wax.
The middle ear is an air filled space located in the temporal bone of the 
skull. Air pressure is equalized in this space via the Eustachian tube which 
drains into the nasopharynx or the back of the throat and nose. There are three 
small bones, or ossicles, that are located adjacent to the tympanic membrane. 
The malleus, incus, and stapes are attached like a chain to the tympanic membrane 
and convert sound waves that vibrate the membrane into mechanical vibrations of 
the three bones. The stapes fills the oval window which is the connection to the 
inner ear.


If your balance is impaired, you may feel as if the room is spinning. You 
	may stagger when you try to walk or teeter or fall when you try to stand up. 
	Some of the symptoms you might experience are:
Other symptoms are nausea and vomiting, diarrhea, changes in heart rate 
	and blood pressure, and fear, anxiety, or 
	panic. Some people also feel 
	tired, depressed, or unable to concentrate. Symptoms may come and go over 
	short time periods or last for longer periods of time.


A balance disorder may be caused by viral or bacterial infections in the 
	ear, a head injury, or blood circulation disorders that affect the inner ear 
	or brain. Many people experience problems with their sense of balance as 
	they get older. Balance problems and dizziness also can result from taking 
	certain medications.
In addition, problems in the visual and skeletal systems and the nervous 
	and circulatory systems can be the source of some posture and balance 
	problems. A circulatory system disorder, such as low blood pressure, can 
	lead to a feeling of dizziness when we suddenly stand up. Problems in the 
	skeletal or visual systems, such as arthritis or eye muscle imbalance, also 
	may cause balance problems. However, many balance disorders can begin all of 
	a sudden and with no obvious cause.

            
            Readers Comments 8
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
Dizziness or 
		vertigo (a spinning sensation)
Falling or feeling as if you are going to fall
Lightheadedness, faintness, or a floating sensation
Blurred vision
Confusion or disorientation
