The symptoms of vasculitis vary greatly from person to person, and depend upon the organs affected and the severity.


The only known risk factors for HSP are exposure to certain viruses and drugs. The reaction to these agents that leads to HSP is not, however, predictable.


Classically, HSP causes a purple-appearing skin rash, pain in the abdomen, and joint inflammation (arthritis). Not all features need be present for the diagnosis. The rash of skin lesions appears in gravity-dependent areas, such as the legs. The joints most frequently affected with pain and swelling are the ankles and the knees. Patients with HSP can develop fever. Inflammation of the blood vessels in the kidneys (nephritis) can cause blood and/or protein in the urine. Abdominal pain and gastrointestinal bleeding is more common in children than in adults. Serious kidney complications are infrequent but can occur.
Symptoms usually last approximately a month. Recurrences are not frequent but do occur.


HSP is usually diagnosed based on the typical skin, joint, and kidney findings. Throat culture, urinalysis, and blood tests for inflammation and kidney function are used to suggest the diagnosis. A biopsy of the skin, and less commonly kidneys, can be used to demonstrate vasculitis. Special staining techniques (direct immunofluorescence) of the biopsy specimen can be used with microscopic examination to document antibody deposits of IgA in the blood vessels of involved tissue.
Generally vasculitis causes fatigue and malaise.
Sometime vasculitis can lead to weakness and weight loss.
Vasculitis affecting the skin can cause rashes, skin discoloration, and ulcers.
Vasculitis affecting the muscles can cause muscle pain.
Vasculitis affecting the lungs can cause shortness of breath and cough.
Vasculitis affecting the heart can cause congestive heart failure.
Vasculitis affecting the brain can cause headaches, confusion, seizures, stroke, paralysis, numbness, and lightheadedness.
Vasculitis affecting the kidneys can cause kidney failure.

            
            Readers Comments 67
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
