

According to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-V), in order to be diagnosed with ADHD, a child should exhibit six symptoms of inattention or six symptoms of combined hyperactivity and impulsivity, and an older teen or adult need only demonstrate five of each group of symptoms. Diagnostic criteria further state that symptoms should begin prior to 12 years of age, occur in more than one setting (like home and work), be significant enough to cause difficulties for the person, and not be able to be better explained by another illness. There are three types of ADHD: predominately inattentive presentation, predominately hyperactive/impulsive presentation, and the combined (inattentive, hyperactive, and impulsive) presentation.
Many health care professionals, like psychiatrists, psychologists, social workers, mental health physician's assistants and nurse practitioners, may help diagnose ADHD. A professional will likely perform or refer for a thorough medical interview and physical exam as part of the evaluation. Since ADHD can be associated with other mental health conditions, like depression, bipolar disorder, obsessive compulsive disorder, and other anxiety disorders, as well as with autism-spectrum disorders, the evaluator will likely screen for signs of those and other forms of mental illness. The signs and symptoms of adult ADHD may also be caused by many medical conditions or can be a side effect of a number of medications. Therefore, blood tests are frequently done as part of the initial assessment. Occasionally, an imaging study like an X-ray or CAT scan may be necessary. As part of the evaluation, the individual may be asked questions from a standardized questionnaire or self-test to assist in determining the diagnosis. Some ADHD symptom checklists for children have been adapted to screen for the condition in adults. Examples of such diagnostic tools include the Conners' Adult ADHD Rating Scale (CAARS) and the Adult Self Report Scale.

            
            Readers Comments 2
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
