

Anabolic steroids are used as performance-enhancing drugs to increase the ability to do work and exercise by abnormally stimulating muscle growth, power, and aerobic capacity. This increased function comes with a cost of potentially life-threatening side effects.
The complications of anabolic steroid abuse are a result of excess testosterone affecting almost all the organ systems in the body. Some of the effects are reversible and decrease when the drug abuse stops while others are permanent and irreversible.
In males, the excess steroid suppresses the normal testosterone production in the body. This can lead to shrunken testicles and decreased sperm count, baldness, and breast development (gynecomastia).
In females, anabolic steroid abuse can lead to masculinization with loss of body fat and breast size, swelling of the clitoris (which may be permanent and not resolve, even though a woman stops using steroids), deepening of the voice, and the development of facial and body hair.
Life-threatening side effects include heart attack and stroke, the risk of forming blood clots (deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolus), liver cancer, and liver failure.
Excess steroid use often affects the skin, and the issues are similar to the adolescent male going through puberty with its testosterone spike. Hair can become oily.
Acne is often present. Acne conglobata is a particularly severe form of acne that can develop during steroid abuse or even after a person stops taking the drug. Infections are a common side effect of steroid abuse because of needle sharing and unsanitary techniques used when injecting the drugs into the skin. These are similar risks to IV drug abusers with increased potential to acquire blood-borne infections such as hepatitis and HIV/AIDS. Skin abscesses may occur at injection sites and may spread to other organs of the body. Endocarditis or an infection of the heart valves is not uncommon.
Psychiatric and psychological complications include manic behavior and psychosis, including hallucinations and delusions. Aggressive behavior is common and known as "roid rage."
Because the muscle growth can occur quickly, it can cause stress on the tendons that attach the muscle to bone and those who abuse anabolic steroids are at risk for tendon rupture.
Anabolic steroids can increase bone production, especially in the skull and face. Teeth can splay apart as the maxilla and mandible grow. There can be overgrowth of the forehead, giving an "Incredible Hulk" appearance. If adolescent teenagers abuse steroids before they have finished growing, these drugs can prematurely close bone growth plates, leading to short stature.

            
            Share Your Story
        
