

To understand antisocial personality disorder (ASPD or APD), it is necessary to learn what having any personality disorder involves. As defined by the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual for Mental Disorders (DSM-V, 2013), a personality disorder (PD) is a consistent, enduring pattern of inner experiences and behaviors that is significantly different from what is thought to be consistent with the individual's own social and cultural norms.
Mental health professionals group personality disorders based on a commonality of symptoms.
Cluster A personality disorders are those that include symptoms of social isolation, and/or strange, eccentric behavior. These disorders include
Cluster B personality disorders are those that involve dramatic or erratic behaviors (counter-social behaviors). These personality disorders include
Cluster C personality disorders have difficulties with anxiety and inhibited behavior. These disorders include
Antisocial personality disorder is specifically a persistent pattern of disregarding and violating the rights of others. Called dissocial personality disorder internationally, the United States-based Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5) describes antisocial personality disorder as having diagnostic criteria of a pattern of inner experiences and behaviors that must include at least three of the following specific signs and symptoms:
Other important characteristics of this disorder include that medical professionals do not diagnose this disorder in children (individuals younger than 18 years of age), but the affected person must have shown symptoms of this diagnosis (conduct disorder) at least since 15 years of age. Additionally, a medical professional cannot diagnose antisocial personality disorder if the person only shows symptoms of antisocial personality disorder at the same time they are suffering from symptoms of schizophrenia or of bipolar disorder. Describing bipolar disorder as one of the exclusion criteria (diagnoses whose presence means that the diagnosis of antisocial personality disorder cannot be assigned) is a change from how this disorder was described in the previous diagnostic manual in the United States, the DSM-IV-TR (Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition, Text Revision). The DSM-IV described having a manic episode as the exclusion criterion with schizophrenia, not having the depressive aspect of bipolar disorder as an exclusion criterion.
Intermittent explosive disorder is a recognized diagnosis whose symptoms involve aggression that is excessive in response to its trigger. People may mistake its symptoms for those of antisocial personality disorder. Misophonia, a newly described diagnosis not recognized in the DSM-V, has symptoms that include the sufferer responding to being provoked to anger and impulsive aggression by sights or sounds that are innocuous to most people. The aggression of this disorder may also be mistaken for antisocial personality disorder.
Antisocial personality disorder tends to occur in about 1% of women and 3% of men in the United States. Antisocial personality symptoms in women tend to include self-harm and more of the other symptoms of borderline personality disorder (BPD) than in men.

            
            Readers Comments 11
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
paranoid personality disorder,
schizotypal personality disorder,
schizoid personality disorder.
antisocial personality disorder,
borderline personality disorder,
histrionic personality disorder,
narcissistic personality disorder.
avoidant personality disorder,
dependent personality disorder,
obsessive compulsive personality disorder (OCD).
Repeatedly breaking laws, as evidenced by repeatedly engaging in behaviors that are grounds for arrest (for example, stealing, fire-setting, other destruction of property, assaults)
Repeated deceitfulness in relationships with others, such as telling lies, using false names, or conning others for profit or pleasure
Failure to think or plan ahead (impulsivity)
Tendency to irritability, hostility, anger, and aggressiveness, as shown by repeatedly assaulting others or getting into frequent physical fights
Disregard for their own safety or the safety of others, such that they have a lack of self-control and are prone to repeatedly engaging in risk-taking behaviors
Persistent lack of taking responsibility, such as failing to establish a pattern of good work habits or keeping financial obligations
A disregard for other people such that there is a lack of feeling guilty about wrongdoing
