

Binge eating disorder symptoms and signs include recurring episodes of binge eating (consuming excessively large amounts of food) without purging (self-induced vomiting), excessive exercising, the inappropriate use of medications, or any other unhealthy behaviors that are often used by bulimic individuals to attempt to compensate for the binge episodes. People with this mental illness tend to engage in stress or other emotional eating, take longer to feel full, and are more likely to feel like they are starving when they are not. The binge episodes are associated with at least three of the following characteristics:
Also, the individual with binge eating disorder experiences marked distress regarding their binge eating.


As is true with virtually any mental health diagnosis, there is no one test that definitively indicates that someone has binge eating disorder. Therefore, health care professionals assess this disorder by gathering comprehensive medical, family, and mental health information. The health care professional will also either conduct a physical examination or ask that the individual's primary care doctor perform one. The medical assessment will usually include lab tests to evaluate the person's general health and to explore whether or not the person has a medical condition that has what appear to be mental health symptoms.
In asking questions about psychological symptoms, mental health professionals are often exploring if the individual suffers from symptoms that meet diagnostic criteria for binge eating disorder or another eating disorder, like anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa, as described in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorder, Fifth Edition (DSM-V). To qualify for the diagnosis of binge eating disorder, the person must engage in bingeing at least once per week for three months. The DSM-IV-TR and earlier editions of the diagnostic handbook did not include binge eating disorder as a diagnosis. Rather, it was captured under the diagnosis of Eating Disorder, Not Otherwise Specified (ED, NOS).
Practitioners will also explore whether symptoms of depression and/or mania, anxiety, substance abuse, hallucinations or delusions, as well as some behavioral disorders are occurring. People with binge eating disorder may seem to engage in compulsive eating, having symptoms in common with obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD). Health care professionals may provide the people they evaluate with a quiz or self-test as a screening tool for binge eating disorder and other eating disorders. Since some of the symptoms of binge eating disorder can also occur with other conditions, the mental health screening is designed to determine if the individual suffers from any emotional problem. In order to assess the person's current emotional state, health care professionals conduct a mental-status examination, as well.

            
            Share Your Story
        
Eating faster than normal
Eating large amounts of food when not physically hungry
Eating until uncomfortably full
Eating alone because of feeling embarrassed about their eating behaviors
Feeling disgusted with oneself, sad, or guilty after overeating
