

As indicated in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-V), in order to qualify for the diagnosis of bipolar disorder, a person must experience at least one manic episode. Characteristics of mania must last at least a week (unless it is part of mixed features) and include
Symptoms of the manic episode of early onset bipolar disorder in childhood or adolescence tend to include outbursts of anger, rage, and aggression, as well as irritability, as opposed to the expansive, excessively elevated mood seen in adults. The adolescent with bipolar disorder is more likely to exhibit depression and mixed episodes with rapid changes in mood. Despite differences in the symptoms of bipolar disorder in teens and children compared to adults, many who are diagnosed with certain kinds of pediatric bipolar disorder continue to have those symptoms as adults.
Symptoms of bipolar disorder in women tend to include more depression and anxiety and a rapid cycling pattern compared to symptoms in men, and men with bipolar disorder are more at risk for having an alcohol or other substance use disorder compared to women with the mood disorder. Women bipolar disorder sufferers are also more prone to experience thyroid disease or obesity compared to men.
Although a major depressive episode is not required for the diagnosis of bipolar disorder, such episodes often alternate with manic episodes. In fact, persistent sadness tends to occur more often than mania in many people with bipolar disorder.
Characteristics of depressive episodes (bipolar depression) include a number of the following symptoms: persistently depressed or irritable mood; feelings of apprehension; frequent crying, inability to feel pleasure; loss of interest in previously pleasurable activities; apathy, low motivation; increased or decreased appetite, weight loss or weight gain, difficulty falling asleep; excess sleepiness, agitation or lack of activity; fatigue/low energy; feelings of worthlessness; lack of concentration; slowness in activity and thought; inappropriate feelings of guilt; hopelessness; thoughts of death, self-harm or suicidal thoughts, plans, or actions.

            
            Readers Comments 17
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
elevated, expansive, or irritable mood;
racing thoughts;
pressured speech (rapid, excessive, and frenzied speaking);
decreased need for sleep;
grandiose ideas (for example, false beliefs of superiority or failures);
tangential speech (repeatedly changing conversational topics to topics that are hardly related);
restlessness/increased goal-directed activity;
impulsivity, poor judgment or engaging in risky activity (like spending sprees, promiscuity, or excess desire for sex).
