

The time it takes for an individual to feel the effects of cocaine and the amount of time that cocaine stays in the bloodstream is a function of the way the drug is taken. For example, when cocaine is in the solid form of crack cocaine, the person feels the effects of smoking the drug within seconds and the effects are short term, while the powder form of cocaine that is snorted (taken intranasally) takes up to 10 minutes to take effect and lasts somewhat longer. Regardless of how this drug is taken, it tends to cause the user to become intensely euphoric and to have a highly intensified sense of every pleasure. Then the person tends to become hyperactive and excessively alert. Once the high wears off (in less than 20 minutes for smoking crack), the person often becomes irritable, agitated, and uncomfortable.
Regardless of whether cocaine is smoked, snorted, or injected, the physiological (biological) effects of cocaine on the brain involve the drug's effects on brain chemicals called neurotransmitters. Specifically, cocaine tends to dramatically increase the release of dopamine, norepinephrine, and serotonin. Because these chemicals are involved in pleasure and well-being, alertness, increase in blood pressure and pulse (heart rate), as well as happiness, the effects of cocaine on the body and mind are consistent with these side effects. Other physical signs and symptoms of cocaine use include decreased appetite, sleep, and male infertility.
When a person withdraws from the effects of cocaine, the decrease in neurotransmitters can result in a sudden drop in blood pressure or pulse, severe depression, and sometimes even suicidal thoughts and attempts. For those who overdose on cocaine, the effect of excess dopamine can cause anger, aggressiveness, violence, psychosis, and sometimes homicidal thoughts and behavior. Physical symptoms that can occur when a person smokes, snorts or injects cocaine in overdose can include seizures, irregular heartbeats (arrhythmias), and heart attack. Cocaine abuse also tends to result in decreased inhibitions that can lead to risky sexual and other high-risk behaviors.
