

Latent CMV infection only rarely reactivates in healthy adults. Adults at risk for life-threatening reactivation with CMV disease include those who are immunosuppressed due to advanced HIV disease, those who receive intensive chemotherapy or immune-suppressing drugs, or those who receive organ or bone marrow transplants.
There is some debate, but CMV seems to be associated with severe exacerbations of ulcerative colitis (UC), which is a condition that may require anti-inflammatory and immune-suppressing drugs. Some studies have found CMV in the colon tissue of up to 40% of those with severe UC that is not responding to corticosteroid anti-inflammatory treatment. People with steroid-resistant UC may need total removal of the colon (colectomy). It is not clear whether CMV is an innocent bystander in those with UC, although there is some evidence antiviral treatment may reduce colectomy in steroid-resistant cases. In these cases, CMV is found in high quantity: CMV DNA by PCR is often > 250 copies/mg of tissue.


In those with HIV/AIDS, CMV most often reactivates when the T cell count (T helper cells, or CD4 cells) drop below 50 cells/microL. One of the most common types of CMV disease in people with advanced HIV/AIDS is CMV retinitis, which may cause permanent blindness. Once highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART, or ART) was introduced in 1996, the incidence of CMV retinitis dropped almost 90%. However, some individuals still develop CMV. Some are not able to tolerate ART, or develop resistance, or simply do not adhere to treatment. CMV retinitis is a marker for 60% increased overall mortality in patients with HIV. For those whose T cell count remains low, overall mortality is 100%. In those whose T cells are under 100/microL, a dilated eye exam is recommended every six months for CMV; if T cells are under 50/microL, screening should occur every three months. CMV reactivation in these patients is not limited to the eye and may be difficult to diagnose. Other manifestations of CMV in advanced HIV disease includes encephalitis, peripheral nerve damage, and disease of the gastrointestinal tract (esophagitis, enteritis, or colitis).
