

Because human carriers or symptomatic individuals are the main reservoir for infection, situations such as overcrowding (dormitories, institutional housing, poor living conditions), incomplete immunization, and people who are immunocompromised are at higher risk for getting diphtheria. Diphtheria spreads by inhalation of airborne droplets or by direct contact with infected patients by mucous secretions or skin ulcerations. Some people may carry the bacteria in their respiratory tracts (termed carriers) but do not exhibit disease. However, such individuals can still transmit the organisms to uninfected individuals.


Physicians make a preliminary diagnosis of diphtheria from the patient's history and physical exam and the presence of a pseudomembrane formation in the throat especially if there is a history of not receiving vaccination. Medical professionals base their confirmation on isolation of the organism from swab specimens taken from the throat or from skin lesions. However, because diphtheria can be lethal, the CDC recommends immediate treatment if diphtheria suspected; do not wait for laboratory confirmation.


There are two treatment strategies that are used for patients diagnosed with diphtheria. Both are most effective when utilized early in the disease process. The first treatment is antibiotics. The CDC recommends erythromycin as the first-line therapy for patients older than 6 months of age. For patients who are younger or who cannot take erythromycin, the CDC recommends intramuscular penicillin. Patients usually become noninfectious after about 48 hours of antibiotic treatment, and medical professionals should isolate patients until that time to prevent spread of the disease.
The second treatment is administration of diphtheria antitoxin. However, this antitoxin is only available from the CDC. Diphtheria antitoxin reduces the progression of the disease by binding diphtheria toxin that has not yet attached to the body's cells. The antitoxin comes from horses, so recipients should not be treated if they are allergic. Your doctor will make the decision if you need only antibiotics or antibiotics plus antitoxin based on your symptoms, immunization status, and disease progression.

            
            Readers Comments 1
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
