

There is no specific definitive test, like a blood test, that can accurately assess that a person has dissociative identity disorder. Therefore, mental health practitioners like psychiatrists, psychoanalysts, or clinical psychologists conduct a mental health interview that gathers information, looking for the presence of the signs and symptoms previously described. Using structured interviews like the Structured Clinical Interview for Dissociative Disorders (SCID-D) is thought to be particularly helpful in distinguishing DID from other mental illnesses.
The diagnostic criteria described in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5) for dissociative identity disorder are as follows:
Professionals usually gather information about the individual's childhood and ask questions to explore whether the symptoms that the client is suffering from are not better accounted for by another mental health condition, dissociative or otherwise. Other types of dissociative disorders include depersonalization/derealization disorder (feeling detached from themselves or surroundings), dissociative amnesia (memory problems associated with a traumatic experience), other dissociative disorder (episodes of dissociation that do not qualify for one of the specific dissociative disorders just described but the professional determining the diagnosis describes the reason why the criteria for a specific dissociative disorder is not met, as in when a person is in a trance), and unspecified dissociative disorder, formerly called dissociative disorder, not otherwise specified (DD,NOS), which is characterized by episodes of dissociation that do not qualify for one of the specific dissociative disorders just described). As part of the assessment, mental health professionals also usually ask about other mental conditions and ensure that the person has recently received a comprehensive physical examination and any appropriate medical tests so that any physical conditions that may mimic symptoms of DID are identified and addressed.
Dissociation, a major symptom of DID, occurs in a number of other mental illnesses. For example, an individual with this disorder may seek to relieve overwhelming trauma-related memories by engaging in the self-mutilation and other forms of self-harm/self-injurious and self-destructive behaviors found in those with borderline personality disorder. Also, feelings and behaviors that may appear to be caused by dissociation, but are not, make it all the more difficult to distinguish DID from other conditions. Somatic symptom disorder, conversion disorder, and schizophrenia are just a few such disorders. Rape and other adult trauma victims are quite vulnerable to developing dissociative symptoms. The controversy about whether DID exists, as well as the overlap of symptoms it has with a number of other conditions, sometimes results in misdiagnosis.
Symptoms of some other mental disorders may be mistaken for dissociation. The apparent impulsivity of bipolar disorder or wide mood swings associated with bipolar disorder, borderline personality disorder, or narcissistic personality disorder when triggered by minor slights are examples. People may also confuse the unstable self-image of borderline personality disorder with dissociation. Blackouts related to substance use disorders (formerly described as substance abuse or dependence) are other instances of an individual being unaware of his or her surroundings that mimic dissociation.
DID often co-occurs with other emotional conditions, including posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), borderline personality disorder (BPD), and a number of other personality disorders, as well as conversion disorder. DID is sometimes feigned by individuals who may be seeking attention, as in Munchausen's syndrome. It has also been appropriately diagnosed as well as feigned in individuals involved in the criminal justice and civil or family court systems (for example, forensic cases). Adding to the diagnostic difficulty is that people like pedophiles and other sex offenders, as well as people with antisocial personality disorder, may legally stand to gain from having DID. While some of those individuals may feign the diagnosis in an effort to benefit legally, others genuinely suffer from significant dissociative symptoms, as well as full-blown DID. In cases where there may be an ulterior motive for being diagnosed with DID, studies show that using a screening test or structured interview may be the best way to determine if the person truly suffers from this condition.
The presence of two or more distinct identities or personality states (each with its own relatively persistent pattern of perceiving, relating to, and thinking about him or herself and the world)
At least two of the identities or personality states repeatedly take control of the person's behavior.
An inability to recall important personal information that is too severe to be explained by ordinary forgetfulness
The illness is not the result of the direct physiological effects of a substance (for example, blackouts or other abnormal behavior during alcohol or other drug intoxication) or a general medical condition (for example, seizures). In children, imaginary playmates or other fantasy play do not cause the symptoms.
