

The risk factors for Ebola hemorrhagic fever are travel to areas with reported Ebola infections (see current CDC travel advisories for African countries). In addition, association with animals (mainly primates in the area with reported Ebola infections) is potentially a health risk factor according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Another potential source of the virus is eating or handling "bush meat." Bush meat is the meat of wild animals, including hoofed animals, primates, bats, and rodents. Evidence for any airborne transmission of this virus is lacking. During Ebola hemorrhagic fever outbreaks, health care workers and family members and friends associated with an infected person (human-to-human transfer) are at the highest risk of getting the disease. Researchers who study Ebola hemorrhagic fever viruses are also at risk of developing the disease if a laboratory accident occurs. Caring for infected patients who are near-death or disposing of bodies of individuals that have recently died of Ebola infection is a very high risk factor because in these situations, the Ebola virus is highly concentrated in any blood or bodily secretions. Caregivers should wear appropriate personal protective equipment (See the CDC site http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/healthcare-us/hospitals/infection-control.html for details).


Unfortunately, early symptoms of Ebola virus disease are nonspecific and include
As the disease progresses, patients may develop other symptoms and signs such as

            
            Readers Comments 1
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
fever,
headache (severe),
weakness,
vomiting,
diarrhea,
stomach discomfort or pain in the abdomen,
decreased appetite, and
joint and muscle discomfort.
a rash or red spots on the skin,
eye redness,
hiccups,
sore throat,
cough and/or coughing or vomiting up blood,
chest pain,
mental confusion,
bleeding both inside and outside the body (for example, mucosal surfaces, eyes), and
difficulty breathing and swallowing.
