

Successful treatment of elimination disorders includes reestablishing an 
appropriate bowel evacuation regimen and development of a program to ensure 
maintenance of such a stool elimination pattern. A program that may include the 
use of laxatives, changes in diet, toileting behavior adjustments, and close 
follow-up has been shown to provide the highest rate of success. The therapeutic 
approach is often defined by the age of the child. 
Breastfed infants are less 
likely to have stooling problems when compared with their formula-fed peers. 
Diluted prune juice (50:50 with water) will promote a softer and increased 
volume stool. Rectal stimulation with either a rectal thermometer or glycerin 
suppository may be an appropriate technique to address a stool-impacted infant. 
Mineral oil is not recommended for infants due to the possibility of 
gastroesophageal reflux (GER) and possible lung pathology if aspirated. Careful 
attention to the child's stooling pattern is worthwhile when solid foods are 
introduced into the young infant's diet. 
Preschoolers, grammar-school-age, and older children with elimination 
disorders are generally approached in a similar fashion. If the child is 
chronically impacted, the use of an orally administered cathartic (for example, magnesium 
citrate) will "clean out" the colon. Colonic enemas have fallen out of favor due 
to the emotional stress that may be associated with their use. Follow-up daily 
use of water retaining laxatives (for example, polyethylene glycol without electrolytes 
marketed as PEG-3350 or Miralax) is common. This approach allows the chronically 
distended colon to gradually return to a normal volume -- thus allowing 
redevelopment of stretch receptors to respond to the local rectal/anal 
enlargement associated with stool arrival to the area. These water-retaining 
laxatives may be needed for several months before considering a gradual 
tapering. A thorough review of the child's diet is important. Avoidance of large 
amounts of constipating items is paramount. Such foods would include excessive 
milk/dairy products, starches (bread, pasta, etc.), and "fast foods," which are 
often high in saturated fats. Grandmother's suggestion to "eat your fruits and 
vegetables" has solid medical credence. An adequate intake of water as well as 
daily vigorous physical activity will also promote colonic health. Establishment 
of a daily routine of "toilet time" has been shown to be very helpful. Spending 
between five to 10 minutes on the toilet is a generally accepted goal. For young 
children, a reward system is often helpful. The reward should be a response for 
sitting on the toilet for the allotted time -- not the production of stool. 
Passage of a daily normal character stool without discomfort is the intended 
goal of bowel reeducation. 
The use of probiotics has received scientific study in the last few years. 
Pediatric studies are less convincing than those utilizing adult patients and 
many studies present conflicting results. There has been no documentation of a 
deleterious effect of probiotic usage in children or adults. 
