

The cause of heart failure is a weakened or thickened cardiac muscle. For 
example, in chronic high blood pressure (hypertension), the heart must pump 
extra forcefully against the additional blood pressure. First it becomes 
enlarged and thickened. But over time, the heart weakens, scarring (fibrosis) 
develops, and it becomes less efficient at pumping. It can become larger 
(dilated) and weak or thickened and stiff. When the risk factors for heart 
failure are present, there usually is inflammatory stress, which further damages 
the cardiac muscle depleting cells of energy and antioxidants. 


While doctors define heart failure in stages or classifications, it 
represents a progression of heart muscle weakness. Sometimes people refer to 
this process as chronic heart failure but technically that term isn't correct.

The New York Heart Association (NYHA) puts the stages of heart failure into 
four classifications:
The American Heart Association along with the American College of Cardiology 
grades heart failure in four stages, and takes into account that heart failure 
can be present even before symptoms appear:


Class I: no limitations in activity. 
Normal activities can be performed.
Class II: mild limitations and mild 
symptoms with activity; no symptoms at rest
Class III: noticeable limitations in 
activity; only comfortable at rest
Class IV: symptoms occur at any level 
of activity and uncomfortable even resting
Stage A: No heart failure, but at high 
risk due to another medical condition that can lead to heart failure, such as 
high blood pressure, diabetes, obesity, or coronary artery disease.
Stage B: The heart has been damaged by 
	the patient's other medical condition(s) or other factors, but no symptoms 
	are present yet.
Stage C: The heart is damaged and the patient is experiencing heart failure symptoms.
Stage D: The patient has severe heart failure 
that requires specialized care, despite receiving treatment (end-stage).
Heart failure can be diagnosed by physical exam, reported symptoms, or chest 
X-ray. 
An echocardiogram test can identify a low ejection fraction or a 
thickened, stiff heart muscle. 
Echocardiograms may be used to distinguish 
between systolic and diastolic types of heart failure. 
Blood tests such as BNP 
(beta naturetic peptide) suggest heart failure. 
Algorithms and guidelines exist 
to score and weigh signs and symptoms to help make the diagnosis. 
