


Joint replacement surgery in the hand is an excellent option for 
treating arthritis of the hand in older, low-activity patients and 
for those with rheumatoid arthritis. Joint replacement surgery can 
provide pain relief, increase finger range of motion, and improve 
hand function.



Hand joint replacement surgery options differ according to the 
specific joint(s) involved.

1. DIP joint (joint closest to the fingertip): This joint is 
not a good candidate for joint replacement.  The bones are very small 
and do not hold the implant very well. The best treatment option for 
advanced arthritis at this joint is fusion.  Hand function is only 
minimally compromised by lack of motion at this joint after a fusion 
procedure, while pain is relieved.


2. PIP joint (second joint from the fingertip): Joint 
replacement is commonly performed in the PIP joint.  Hand function, 
especially power grasp, can be hindered by fusion of this joint.  The 
small and ring fingers are the best candidates for joint replacement 
as they are the most important for power grasp.  The index finger is 
not a good candidate for a PIP joint replacement, as it must 
withstand sideways forces which accompany movements such as key 
turning and fine manipulation of objects.  These forces cause excess 
stress on the joint implant and can lead to early implant breakage.
There have been numerous false (prosthetic) joints designed for PIP 
joint replacement, but only one has stood the test of time.  The only 
nonexperimental PIP joint replacement is the silicone 
interpositional arthroplasty.  These joints are made of silicone 
rubber and have a flexible hinge in the middle and stems at the ends 
which insert into the shaft of the bone, providing stability.  The 
most frequently used silicone joint implants are termed the Swanson 
implant and the Sutter implant.
The best results with PIP joint replacement are in patients with 
rheumatoid arthritis and in older, lower-activity patients.


3. MCP joint (third joint from the fingertip): Osteoarthritis 
rarely affects the MCP joints.  The most common need for joint 
replacement in this joint is destruction from rheumatoid arthritis.  
Silicone joint replacement of the MCP joint has been used since the 
1960s and has produced excellent long-term results.

4. Thumb basal joint (where the thumb meets the wrist): This 
joint is exposed to very high stresses with normal activities.  
Forces felt at the tip of the thumb are multiplied 12 times in 
their effect to the thumb base, thus predisposing this joint to 
wear.  Arthritis of this joint is very common, especially in women, 
and frequently requires joint replacement.  Attempts at silicone 
replacement of this joint have not been as successful as hoped due to 
implant failure and bone destruction.  Thus, the most common joint 
replacement procedure for the thumb base is done with natural 
material.  The procedure is termed the ligament reconstruction-tendon 
interposition procedure (LRTI).  This procedure uses the patient's 
own tendon to stabilize the thumb and resurface the joint.  LRTI 
provides stability and pain relief. Long-term results have been 
excellent.  This has also been called the tendon roll or "anchovy" 
procedure because the tendon used is curled to form the new joint 
cushion.

5. Wrist joint: Most patients with wrist arthritis are best 
treated with surgical joint cleaning or fusion and not joint 
replacement.  Most wrist-joint prostheses on the market are currently 
investigational and for use in extremely low activity patients with 
osteoarthritis or rheumatoid arthritis. 
Summary

Arthritis of the hand and wrist is a very common and complex 
problem with many nonsurgical and surgical treatment options.  
Deciding which alternative is best can require the skills of the primary 
doctor, the arthritis specialist (rheumatologist), and/or an 
orthopedic surgeon.
