

The symptoms and signs of knee injury are related to the type of injury and the part of the knee that was injured.
The main symptoms of knee injury are as follows:
If the injury is acute, the main symptoms will most likely be knee pain and swelling. If the injury is chronic or from overuse, the symptoms of clicking, popping, and intermittent pain will be more prominent.


A knee injury may first be examined and treated by a primary care provider (PCP), such as a family practitioner, an internist, or a child's pediatrician. If you go to the emergency room for your knee injury, you will be seen by an emergency medicine specialist.
If the knee injury is severe, you may be referred to an orthopedist (a specialist in injuries of the musculoskeletal system) or an orthopedic surgeon. If your knee injury is related to sports, you may see a sports medicine specialist.
Other medical professionals who may be involved in treating your injured knee include physical therapists, occupational therapists, or other rehabilitation specialists.


The diagnosis of a knee injury is made by a physician on the basis of history, physical examination, and sometimes the use of X-rays or MRIs.
Depending on the how the knee was injured and whether or not there are accompanying medical issues, the doctor will perform specific tests involving bending or twisting the knee to test the stability of the ligaments and check for damage to the cartilage. Knee-bending tests done by your doctor are designed to isolate specifically which ligament or part of the cartilage has been damaged.
Further testing with X-rays, CT scans, or MRIs may be necessary to evaluate the extent of the injury and help determine treatment and prognosis. X-rays and CT scans are used to asses for bony injuries (fractures), and MRIs are used to evaluate soft-tissue damage (ligaments and cartilage).

            
            Readers Comments 3
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
Knee pain
Swelling
Heat
Redness
Tenderness
Difficulty bending the knee
Problems weight bearing
Clicking or popping sounds
Locking of the knee
Feeling of instability
Bruising
