

Intracellular protozoal parasites from the Leishmania genus cause leishmaniasis. The organisms are microscopic in size. Over 20 species of Leishmania affect humans. The life cycle is relatively simple. Uninfected sand flies acquire the parasite by feeding on infected people or animals. When the sand fly bites a human, it injects small numbers of parasites that mononuclear blood cells rapidly take up. This stage is the promastigote stage. Once inside the human mononuclear cells, the parasite enters the amastigote stage and begins to multiply and infect other cells and tissues. Depending on the species, the parasites may spread via blood and lymph fluid to other body sites, such as the skin or major organs.
Blood transfusions and IV drug users sharing contaminated needles transmit parasites. A pregnant mother may transmit Leishmania to her fetus.


The major risk factor for leishmaniasis is exposure to infected phlebotomine sand flies. The sand flies are most active from dusk to dawn and are more common in rural areas. Casual travelers do not usually visit these areas at night, so infection is more common in adventure travelers, missionaries, humanitarian aid workers (such as Peace Corps workers), soldiers, and those with occupational activities that require them to live in rural areas. In healthy people, the degree of immune response to leishmaniasis appears to be genetically determined and is primarily cell-mediated; antibodies are not protective. CL lesions in people with normal immunity will resolve without treatment in several weeks. These individuals are immune to CL thereafter. In visceral leishmaniasis, a weak cell-mediated immune response is associated with more severe disease. Factors that weaken cell-mediated immunity include malnutrition and co-infection with the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). The cause of mucocutaneous leishmaniasis remains unclear, but an overactive immune response may play a part. Interestingly, Leishmaniavirus can infect the Leishmania parasite itself, which may cause the parasite to be more dangerous by overstimulating the inflammatory response from the human immune system.
Leishmania may live quietly for years in the body and then begin to multiply (reactivate) if the person's immune system becomes suppressed. For example, people with HIV who are being treated with anti-HIV drugs and whose immunity is improving may develop CL or VL as part of an immune reconstitution syndrome (this refers to hidden infections that reveal themselves as the body begins to fight them). Thus, people born in a country with leishmaniasis and those who have had travel-related exposure are at risk if they become immunosuppressed by conditions such as chemotherapy, use of steroids, or infection with HIV. Patients who have previously had cutaneous leishmaniasis acquired in certain parts of the New World are at risk for developing mucocutaneous leishmaniasis.

            
            Readers Comments 3
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
