

There are three methods for treatment of pericoronitis depending on the severity of the condition:
To manage the pain of acute pericoronitis, use over-the-counter medications such as acetaminophen (Tylenol) or ibuprofen (Advil). If it is localized to the tooth and there has been no spread of the infection, a dentist thoroughly cleans out the area under local anesthesia. A dentist may prescribe an oral rinse containing chlorhexidine to keep the area clean. Otherwise, warm saltwater or diluted hydrogen peroxide can be used as an oral rinse. If there is swelling or fever, a dentist may prescribe oral antibiotics such as amoxicillin or erythromycin.
When the molar can be useful for chewing and there is a desire to keep the tooth, minor oral surgery can be performed to remove the operculum. This will allow better access to properly clean the area and prevent the accumulation of bacteria and food debris. In some unfortunate instances, the gum tissue may grow back and create the same problem.
Removal (extraction) of the tooth is the most common treatment method since wisdom teeth oftentimes are poorly positioned and do not erupt completely. This method eliminates any future occurrences of a wisdom tooth infection.
In rare instances, the symptoms become so severe that an individual needs to go the hospital emergency room to seek care due to the rapid spread of a pericoronal abscess. This is especially the case if there is swelling of the lymph nodes.


Sometimes, mild symptoms of pericoronitis can be treated at home through meticulous oral hygiene without the use of antibiotics. Thorough and gentle brushing of the area with a small-headed toothbrush may help to break up the plaque or food that is trapped. Oral water irrigators can be effective in clearing out the debris trapped under the operculum, as well. Rinsing with warm saltwater can help to soothe the area. Additionally, diluted hydrogen peroxide can be used as a rinse or irrigating solution to help reduce the bacteria in the area.
For severe pericoronitis where swelling and fever are present, home treatments are not advised and proper care should be sought with the appropriate health care professional.

            
            Readers Comments 2
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
Management of pain and resolving the pericoronal inflammation and/or infection
Minor oral surgery to remove the overlapping gingival tissue (operculectomy)
Removal of the wisdom tooth
