

There are a number of home remedies and self-care strategies that can help relieve some of the unpleasant symptoms of pregnancy. Many medications, including some kinds of antibiotics, are also safe to take during pregnancy. Talk to your doctor about considering taking, or taking any over-the-counter, prescription medicine, or any supplements or vitamins.
The following are some self-care measures can help alleviate some of the symptoms that may be troubling:


Many of the symptoms of early pregnancy, like breast tenderness, fatigue, mood swings, mild cramping, back pain, and others, are also symptoms that women may experience with premenstrual syndrome (PMS) or after ovulation in the days prior to their menstrual period. Until the menstrual period begins or a pregnancy test is positive, there is no way to tell whether these symptoms are related to PMS or pregnancy.

            
            Read Doctor's View
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
Proper diet and exercise can help lessen symptoms by keeping weight gain under control and strengthening and toning your abdominal muscles. After the first trimester, avoid exercises that involve lying on the back for a prolonged time.
A pregnancy girdle or sling can help support your abdomen.
Wear comfortable shoes that are not too tight, particularly if you have swelling of the legs.
Exercise caution when lifting your other children or heavy objects. Be sure to bend the knees when lifting and try to keep the back straight.
Sleep on a firm mattress. Lying on your side with a pillow between your legs may be a comfortable position that provides some relief.
Wear a bra that provides good support if breasts are tender or sore.
Eat lots of fiber to keep the bowels moving and avoid constipation. This means fresh fruits and vegetables, and whole grains. Taking fiber or stool softeners may help.
Eat small, frequent meals to combat nausea, and avoid foods that trigger nausea. Avoid fatty foods and drink plenty of fluids. Small, frequent meals can also help prevent heartburn.
