

Given the difficulties associated with schizotypal personality disorder, home remedies are not generally entertained as viable options for treating schizotypal personality disorder. Evidence-based treatments that have been found to be useful in helping the sufferer manage some of the symptoms of schizotypal personality disorder include both psychodynamic and cognitive behavioral forms of talk therapy (psychotherapy). Cognitive behavioral therapy, or CBT, is a form of psychotherapy that focuses on helping the person understand how their thoughts and behaviors affect each other. An emphasis on improving social skills is particularly important in addressing the long-standing social deficits that are part of schizotypal personality disorder. Psychodynamic psychotherapy, which is also called psychoanalytic therapy, seeks to help the individual understand and better manage his or her ways of defending against negative emotions.
While medications do not "cure" personality disorders, including schizotypal personality disorder, they may be appropriate to address some of the mental health symptoms that can accompany it, like paranoia, odd behaviors, magical thinking, depression, or anxiety. The first antipsychotic medication was discovered by accident and then used for treatment of schizophrenia. This was chlorpromazine (Thorazine), which was soon followed by medications such as haloperidol (Haldol), fluphenazine (Prolixin), thiothixene (Navane), trifluoperazine (Stelazine), perphenazine (Trilafon), and thioridazine (Mellaril). These medications have become known as "neuroleptics" because, although effective in treating positive symptoms (for example, paranoia, magical thinking, mood swings/emotional lability), they can cause side effects, many of which affect the neurologic (nervous) system. Examples of such neurologic side effects include muscle stiffness or rigidity, painful spasms, restlessness tremors, and muscle twitches. These older medications are thought to be not as effective against so-called negative symptoms such as decreased motivation and lack of emotional expressiveness.
Since 1989, a new class of antipsychotics (atypical or second-generation antipsychotics) has been used. At clinically effective doses, very few of the neurological side effects of traditional (first generation) antipsychotics are observed.
Clozapine (Clozaril), the first drug of this new class, is the only medication that has been shown to be effective where other antipsychotics have failed. Its use is not associated with severe side effects, but it does produce other side effects, including a possible decrease in the number of white blood cells that can become dangerous in rare cases. Therefore, the blood needs to be monitored every week during the first six months of treatment and then every two weeks to identify this side effect early if it occurs.
Other atypical antipsychotics include risperidone (Risperdal), olanzapine (Zyprexa), quetiapine (Seroquel), ziprasidone (Geodon), aripiprazole (Abilify), paliperidone (Invega or Sustenna), asenapine (Saphris), iloperidone (Fanapt), lurasidone (Latuda), and brexpiprazole (Rexulti).
Although sometimes more effective and usually better tolerated, the use of the atypical antipsychotics is also associated with possible side effects, and current medical practice is developing better ways of understanding these effects, identifying people at risk, and monitoring for the emergence of complications. Most of these medications take two to three weeks to take effect. Patience is required if the dose needs to be adjusted, the specific medication is changed, or another medication is added. In order to be able to determine whether an antipsychotic is effective or not, it should be tried for at least four weeks (or even longer with clozapine).
Since people with a schizotypal personality disorder are at increased risk of also developing depression, medications that address that symptom may be of great benefit as well. Serotonergic medications like fluoxetine (Prozac), sertraline (Zoloft), paroxetine (Paxil), citalopram (Celexa), escitalopram (Lexapro), vortioxetine (Trintellix), and vilazodone (Viibryd) are often prescribed because of their effectiveness and low incidence of side effects. Other often-prescribed antidepressant medications for the depression that can be associated with schizotypal personality disorder include venlafaxine (Effexor), duloxetine (Cymbalta), desvenlafaxine (Pristiq), levomilnacipran (Fetzima), and bupropion (Wellbutrin).

            
            Share Your Story
        
