

As with shampoos, creams should be applied until the seborrhea subsides. When the seborrhea comes back (and it will, sooner or later), the creams should be used again.

            
            Readers Comments 4
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
Shampoos: Here are some ingredients in medicated shampoos that can help control dandruff of the scalp. All are available over the counter.Tar (T/Gel)Salicylic acid (T/Sal)Zinc pyrithione (like Head & Shoulders)Selenium sulfide (Selsun Blue)Ketoconazole (Nizoral)One can use any of these either all of the time or just once or twice a week, depending on how severe the symptoms are. If the problem quiets down or disappears, use unmedicated shampoos. If one kind of shampoo works for a while and "runs out of gas," switch to another. For resistant cases, alternate two different types.Many people, especially the elderly, believe that it may be harmful to shampoo frequently. Some avoid washing their scalp for more than a week. However, it is very unlikely that daily shampoos will produce any untoward effects other than removing dandruff.
Tar (T/Gel)
Salicylic acid (T/Sal)
Zinc pyrithione (like Head & Shoulders)
Selenium sulfide (Selsun Blue)
Ketoconazole (Nizoral)
Topical steroids: Two additional types of medication that help seborrhea are cortisone creams and antifungal creams.Corticosteroid creams and lotions reduce inflammation. These can be purchased over the counter in either 0.5% or 1% concentrations. They are safe to use on the face and will often help in just a couple of days when applied twice daily. These products also are available as scalp lotions that are applied once a day, preferably on damp hair after shampooing. One can use scalp corticosteroid creams together with medicated shampoos.Antifungal creams are often effective, apparently because they reduce the number of yeast organisms living on the skin. Over-the-counter creams include 1% clotrimazole cream and miconazole cream 2%. Antifungal creams also are applied once or twice a day.
Corticosteroid creams and lotions reduce inflammation. These can be purchased over the counter in either 0.5% or 1% concentrations. They are safe to use on the face and will often help in just a couple of days when applied twice daily. These products also are available as scalp lotions that are applied once a day, preferably on damp hair after shampooing. One can use scalp corticosteroid creams together with medicated shampoos.
Antifungal creams are often effective, apparently because they reduce the number of yeast organisms living on the skin. Over-the-counter creams include 1% clotrimazole cream and miconazole cream 2%. Antifungal creams also are applied once or twice a day.
