

A classic triad most commonly seen consists of (1) single or multiple 
subdural hematomas (localized bleeding outside of the brain substance), (2) 
diffuse and multi-depth retinal hemorrhages, and (3) diffuse brain injury without 
a reasonable explanation for such severe (and often repeated) trauma. Several 
agencies, including the American Academy of Pediatrics, recommend that the term 
shaken baby syndrome be replaced with abusive head trauma. Such a change 
broadens the various mechanisms of injury commonly seen besides shaking. Blunt 
head trauma is commonly seen in addition to shaking. Common mechanisms of direct 
blows to the head include punching the infant, hitting the head or face with a 
hard object (for example, wooden spoon), or slamming the infant's head against the wall 
or floor.
Because children may not present for evaluation with evidence of trauma 
(bruising, lacerations, etc.), a high index of suspicion must be maintained by 
those responsible for evaluating such children. Missed cases of shaken baby 
syndrome may be incorrectly diagnosed as viral infection (especially 
gastroenteritis, in which children will be lethargic and have a history of 
repeated vomiting) or accidental head injury (for example, fell while being carried by a 
parent, rolled off of a bed, or abuse by an older sibling). Multiple studies have 
demonstrated that, while the duration of shaking necessary to inflict such 
substantial trauma may be accomplished in 15-20 seconds, adult strength is 
necessary to inflict such damage (for example, parental perpetrators may attempt to 
blame a childhood sibling as the culprit). Likewise, rolling off of a bed or 
couch or being held during a parental fall are extremely unlikely to cause such 
injury. Documentation of old skeletal fractures, burns (commonly cigarette or 
hot water immersion), healing bruises, or ligature injury may be discovered 
during an investigation.
Those most likely to inflict trauma on an infant tend to be the father (50%), 
stepfather, male partner of the mother (20%), female babysitters (17%), and 
the mother (12%).
