

The incubation period for smallpox is a little longer than that for many other viruses; symptoms develop about seven to 17 days after exposure.


Most transmission of smallpox is directly from person to person. Large, infectious droplets of saliva are expelled during coughing or sneezing and then inadvertently inhaled by another person. This usually requires close face-to-face contact and is similar to the way that mumps, measles, and influenza are spread. On average, a single individual would infect approximately 60% of their household contacts. Infected objects, such as used silverware or heavily contaminated bedding, may carry sufficient numbers of organisms to infect another person if improperly handled, although this route of transmission is much less common.


Fever is the most common initial symptom and can be quite high. Flu-like symptoms such as body aches, chills, and headache accompany the fever. Often, the patient is too unwell to get out of bed (malaise). Within 24-48 hours, a rash begins to appear everywhere on the body but especially on the legs, arms, mouth, and face. Pharyngitis (sore throat), abdominal pain, back pain, and occasionally vomiting may also develop. Smallpox may also affect the eyes, leading to potential blindness among survivors. Symptoms in children are similar to those in adults. The rash also appears on the palms and soles and goes through stages as the disease progresses. At the beginning, the rash consists of red dots that become raised. The skin lesions (see Figure 1) rapidly fill with fluid and may turn yellow, resembling pus (pus-filled lesions). Rarely, the rash may start to fill with blood (hemorrhagic smallpox), which is a poor prognostic sign. After one to two weeks, the lesions scab over and eventually fall off, leaving deep scars. One of the defining features of smallpox is that all the lesions on the body are always at the same stage of development. This is in contrast to chickenpox where new lesions form while old ones are healing.
Approximately one-third of people with smallpox died from the infection. People who had an extensive rash were at higher risk of death. People who had only a few lesions or a milder rash had a lower risk of death. Infections caused by the variola minor strain were less severe and death occurred in only approximately 1% of cases.

            
            Share Your Story
        
