

About 3,000 youth die by suicide each year in the United States, making it the third leading cause of death in youth ages 10-24. Latino and African-American teenage girls are thought to attempt suicide more often than their age peers who are male or of other ethnic backgrounds. Native-American teens tend to complete suicide nearly twice as often as the national average, and gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgender teens complete suicide four times more than their heterosexual age peers.
Warning signs for teen suicide can include the following:


Many providers of health care may help make the diagnosis of clinical depression in teens, including licensed mental health therapists, pediatricians or other primary care providers, specialists whom you see for a medical condition, emergency physicians, psychiatrists, psychiatric physician's assistants, psychologists, psychiatric nurses, nurse practitioners, and social workers. Since the symptoms of depression can mimic those of other mental health disorders and depression can co-occur with other mental health disorders, the professional will ask about many other emotional problems to make that distinction.
One of these professionals described above also will likely conduct or refer for an extensive medical interview and physical examination as part of establishing the diagnosis. Depression may be associated with a number of other medical conditions or can be a side effect of various medications. For this reason, routine laboratory tests are often performed during the initial evaluation to rule out other causes of symptoms. Occasionally, an X-ray, CT or MRI scan, or other imaging study may be needed. As part of this examination, the sufferer may be asked a series of questions from a standardized questionnaire or self-test to help assess the risk of depression and suicide.
A sudden change in behavior
Lack of motivation
Social withdrawal/isolation
A change in eating patterns
Preoccupation with death or dying
Giving away valued personal possessions
Symptom or signs of depression
Increased moodiness
Hopelessness
What appears to be a sudden improvement in mood (due to resolving to die by suicide)

            
            Share Your Story
        
