

Torsion of a testicular appendage occurs due to twisting (torsion) of the testicular or epididymal appendage, which are functionless structures that are remnants of tissue from human development. The testicular appendage lies between the testicle and the epididymis, while the epididymal appendage typically projects from the epididymis. As with testicular torsion, twisting of these structures leads to a decrease in blood flow and subsequent testicular pain. This is a common condition in younger boys, with most cases occurring between 7 to 14 years of age. Though this condition is benign and self-limiting, it must be distinguished from the more serious testicular torsion.
With torsion of a testicular appendage, the onset of testicle pain may be sudden or gradual, and the severity of pain may range from mild to severe. Generally, a person has no symptoms or signs like nausea, vomiting, and fever.
The testicle and/or scrotum generally appear normal, without swelling and redness; however, other symptoms and signs may include:
Preservation of the normal vertical positioning of the affected testicle within the scrotum, and preservation of the cremasteric reflex is generally maintained.


Occasionally, the pain associated with kidney stones can radiate into the groin area and cause testicular pain. However, the testicles appear normal with no swelling or redness. Other signs and symptoms of kidney stones may include:


In order to diagnose the underlying condition causing testicular pain, a complete history and physical exam will be performed by a health-care professional. Laboratory testing and imaging studies may also be ordered depending on the health-care professional's initial impression and evaluation.
Laboratory testing may include:
Imaging studies may be ordered by your health-care professional to further delineate the underlying cause of the testicular pain. In certain patients with testicular pain whose symptoms are strongly suggestive of testicular torsion, immediate urologic consultation prior to testing should be obtained in order to prevent potential delays in definitive surgical management.
A color Doppler testicular ultrasound is a non-invasive imaging study that can evaluate the blood flow to the testicles, as well as the presence of testicular tumors, fluid collections, testicular rupture, and hernias. A kidney ultrasound can be helpful in the evaluation of kidney stones.
This is an imaging study requiring the intravenous administration of a radionuclide, useful for the evaluation of testicular torsion, as well as other causes of testicular pain. It is used must less commonly than ultrasound.
CT scan or a kidney/ureter/bladder (KUB) X-ray 
These particular imaging studies are sometimes ordered if there is a suspicion that the testicular pain is being caused by kidney stones or other conditions in the abdomen or pelvis.
Testicular tenderness, typically only localized to the top of the right or left testicle.
Sometimes, a small blue-dot is visualized near the top of the affected testicle (blue-dot sign).
Back (flank) pain and tenderness
Abdominal pain
Nausea and vomiting
Urinary symptoms, such as blood in the urine, discomfort with urination and urinary frequency
Blood work
Urinalysis
A swab of the urethra (if the patient has penile discharge suggestive of a sexually transmitted disease)
