

Generally, home remedies are only effective as a temporary measure to calm severe tooth pain and are not intended to cure the problem. How does one try to get instant relief without the aid of a dental professional? Oral pain medication will be a key step. Over-the-counter pain medicines such as ibuprofen (Advil) or naproxen (Aleve) are nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and are best taken on a schedule to provide pain relief. Acetaminophen (Tylenol) is an alternative painkiller. In some cases, alternating doses of ibuprofen and acetaminophen is effective.
The essential oil, clove oil, is a toothache remedy that is actually an ingredient in some sedative dental filling materials. It is a natural home remedy that has a numbing effect and can provide instant relief. Clove oil (eugenol) can be found at the pharmacy. Small amounts of clove oil should be used to the affected area. Dilute a few drops in a teaspoon of olive oil to avoid burning the mouth tissue. Before application of the diluted clove oil, rinse the mouth thoroughly with warm salt water or warm water to clear any debris from the affected area. Then, place a small cotton ball soaked with a few drops of the diluted clove oil on the tooth or gum area. Allow a few minutes after application for the numbing effect to take place. Other products that contain benzocaine (including Orajel or Anbesol) can temporarily numb the affected tooth or gums and provide pain relief as well. If clove oil is not available, plain olive oil can also provide some relief by coating a painful area.
To help a toothache until treatment can be found, one should avoid chewing on the affected tooth/area and minimize extreme temperatures of hot and cold. Keeping the area clean and free of food debris may help as well. Warm salt water or plain warm water rinses can help soothe the affected area and keep the mouth clean. If swelling of the surrounding gums or tissues is present, immediate treatment with a dentist or physician is advised to avoid the spread of infection. Home remedies may temporarily alleviate pain but do not to treat infection.
Above all, proper diagnosis and timely treatment by a dentist is strongly advised to effectively treat a toothache.

            
            Readers Comments 5
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
