It's been shown that vitamin D plays a crucial role in brain development, brain function regulation, and a healthy nervous system. Vitamin D deficiency has been found to be common in patients with Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's disease, schizophrenia, depression, anxiety disorders, dementia, and older adults with cognitive decline. A meta-analysis reported a 2.4-times greater risk of cognitive impairment in people with low vitamin D levels versus those with adequate levels. It's been suggested that maintaining adequate levels of vitamin D levels throughout life may help to prevent age-related neurological disorders.
A summit with the leading experts, including physicians and scientists, from across the world convened in 2013 to review the research in this area and to come up with clear guidelines for the medical and scientific communities. There was a unanimous agreement that low vitamin D levels and/or the insufficient utilization of vitamin D can be considered a risk factor for cognitive decline and dementia in general and supplementation was needed to correct these levels. A review of vitamin D levels in 170 women, 65-77 years of age, over 10 years found that adequate vitamin D levels may be protective against declines in cognitive flexibility and psychomotor speed components of executive function.
The association between lack of sunlight and depressive disorders was first noted 2,000 years ago. There are numerous studies showing low levels of vitamin D are associated with major depression and the symptoms of depression. In a study of over 6,000 people over the age of 50, those with lower vitamin D levels reported more depressive symptoms (for example, felt sad, felt lonely, couldn't get going). Those with the lowest vitamin D levels reported the greatest degree of depressive symptoms. Only small-scale studies have shown success in improving these symptoms by correcting the deficiency. Much more research is needed in this area to find out how best to treat it.
The link between the sun and cancer is typically not seen as a positive one because of the connection with skin cancer. UV-B radiation from the sun is said to be the most important environmental risk factor for nonmelanoma skin cancer. Because the sun is the primary source of vitamin D, researchers are looking to see what role it plays in skin cancer. Some believe that enough sun exposure to keep your vitamin D levels up, while protecting your skin from damage, is beneficial to skin cancer survival. There has also been research to show the protective effect that vitamin D has with the development of other cancers, including colon, breast, and prostate cancer.
In 1941, U.S. pathologist Frank Apperly published geographic data that demonstrated for the first time an inverse correlation between levels of UV-B radiation in North America and mortality rates from cancers. This study suggested that more exposure to UV-B radiation led to fewer deaths from cancers. Since this was published, other studies have suggested that there may be an association between an increased risk of dying of various malignancies (for example, colon, breast, ovarian, melanoma, and prostate cancer) and living far from the equator.
The anti-inflammatory properties of vitamin D may also be able to assist with lowering pain levels in cancer patients when deficiencies are corrected.
Vitamin D deficiency is associated with an increases in hypertension (high blood pressure), hyperlipidemia, peripheral vascular disease, coronary artery disease, myocardial infarction, heart failure, and stroke. The anti-inflammatory effects of vitamin D may be the reason for this, and studies are ongoing to examine this relationship.
A review of six studies that included over 6,400 people found that patients with peripheral arterial disease (PAD) had lower levels of vitamin D and that vitamin D insufficiency may contribute to the development of more advanced PAD. Further research needs to be done to confirm the cause and effect.
