

The period from contracting the infection to the development of symptoms (incubation period) is generally between three to six days.


The bite of infected mosquitoes (for example, Haemagogus leucocelaenus and/or Aedes serratus mosquitoes) transmits yellow fever to humans. Direct contact with other infected individuals does not transmit yellow fever. Humans with yellow fever are infectious and can transmit the virus to uninfected mosquitoes shortly before the onset of fever and for three to five days after the onset of symptoms.


A variety of specialists may become involved in the care of patients who develop symptoms of yellow fever. Initially, primary care physicians, including family physicians, internists, emergency physicians, and pediatricians, may encounter patients with yellow fever. Infectious-disease specialists care for individuals diagnosed with yellow fever, as well. Patients with yellow fever may see other specialists depending on the severity of their illness and the development of complications (for example, a nephrologist in cases of kidney failure).


After infection with the yellow fever virus, many individuals will experience no clinically apparent manifestations of the mosquito-borne disease (asymptomatic), while others will go on to develop a mild, self-limiting flu-like illness characterized by the following symptoms and signs:
Most patients with this initial acute phase of the disease improve spontaneously after approximately three to four days. However, approximately 15% of patients may enter a second phase of the disease that typically appears after a short remission of symptoms (about 24 hours) from the initial phase of the illness. This next toxic phase of the disease is more severe, at which time the high fever returns and more organ systems become involved. In addition to the above symptoms, the following symptoms and signs may also develop:

            
            Share Your Story
        
Fever
Chills
Generalized muscle pain
Back pain
Headache
Malaise
Weakness
HIV
Nausea
Vomiting
Abdominal pain
Prevention
Bleeding from the gums, nose, eyes, and/or stomach
Blood in the stool and blood in the vomit
Easy bruising of the skin
Kidney failure
Confusion
Seizures
Coma
