

Fever Center
Take the Cold & Flu Quiz
Do Flu Shots Cause Flu?
Is It a Cold or The Flu?
Patient Comments: Fever - Treatments
Patient Comments: Fever - Signs and Symptoms
Patient Comments: Fever - Complications
Patient Comments: Fever - Causes
Find a local Family Physician in your town
Fever facts
What is a fever?
What causes a fever?
What are the signs and symptoms of a fever?
How do health care professionals diagnose a fever?
How should someone take a temperature for fever?
What is the treatment for a fever?
What are home remedies for a fever?
When should someone seek medical care for a fever?
What kind of doctors treat a fever?
What are complications of a fever?
What is the prognosis for a fever?
Is it possible to prevent a fever?
Where can people find more information about fevers?
Although a fever (pyrexia) could be considered any body temperature above the normal temperature of 98.6 degrees Fahrenheit (98.6 F or 37 C), medically, a person is not considered to have a significant fever until the temperature is above 100.4 F (38.0 C).
Most fever is beneficial, causes no problems, and helps the body fight off infections. The main reason to treat a fever is to increase comfort.
Fever is the result of an immune response by your body to a foreign invader. Foreign invaders include viruses, bacteria, fungi, drugs, or other toxins.
Children under 3 months of age with a higher-than-normal temperature of 100.4 F (38.0 C) or greater should be seen by a health care professional. They may be quite ill and not show any signs or symptoms besides a fever. Infants younger than 6 weeks of age should be seen immediately by their doctor.
Acetaminophen (Tylenol and others) and ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin) can be used to treat a fever. Aspirin should not be used in children or adolescents to control fever.
The prognosis for a fever depends on the cause. Most cases of fever are self-limited and resolve with treatment of symptoms.
A person who is taking immunosuppressant drugs or who has a history of or diagnosis of cancer, AIDS, or other serious illness, such as heart disease or diabetes, should seek medical care if a fever develops.
