

*Addison's Disease Facts by John P. Cunha, DO, FACOE


Addison's disease is an endocrine or hormonal disorder that occurs in all age groups and afflicts men and women equally. The disease is characterized by weight loss, muscle weakness, fatigue, low blood pressure, and sometimes darkening of the skin in both exposed and nonexposed parts of the body.
Addison's Disease Center
Take the Kidney Disease Quiz
Kidney Stones Slideshow Pictures
High Blood Pressure Slideshow Pictures
Patient Comments: Addison's Disease - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Addison's Disease - Treatments
Patient Comments: Addison's Disease - Share Your Experience
Patient Comments: Addison's Disease - Causes
Find a local Endocrinologist in your town
Addison's disease facts*
What is Addison's disease?
How does Addison's disease occur?
What is cortisol?
How is cortisol regulated?
What is aldosterone?
What causes Addison's disease?
Primary adrenal insufficiency
Polyendocrine deficiency syndrome
Tuberculosis
Other causes of Addison's disease
Secondary adrenal insufficiency
What are the signs and symptoms of Addison's disease?
How is Addison's disease diagnosed?
How is Addison's disease treated?
Surgery
Pregnancy?
Patient education
For more information
Addison's disease, also called adrenal insufficiency, or hypocortisolism, occurs when the adrenal glands do not produce enough of the hormone cortisol and, in some cases, the hormone aldosterone.
Addison's disease is an endocrine or hormonal disorder characterized by weight loss, muscle weakness, fatigue, low blood pressure, and sometimes darkening of the skin.
Most cases of Addison's disease are caused by autoimmune disorders. As a result, often both glucocorticoid (cortisol) and mineralocorticoid (aldosterone) hormones are lacking.
Tuberculosis (TB), an infection which can destroy the adrenal glands, accounts for about 20 percent of cases of primary adrenal insufficiency in developed countries.
Secondary adrenal insufficiency is more common than primary adrenal insufficiency due to a lack of ACTH.
Symptoms of Addison's disease begin gradually and include chronic, worsening fatigue, muscle weakness, loss of appetite, and weight loss.
Symptoms of an addisonian crisis, or acute adrenal insufficiency, include sudden penetrating pain in the lower back, abdomen, or legs, severe vomiting and diarrhea, dehydration, low blood pressure, and loss of consciousness.
Addison's is diagnosed with blood tests and/or a CT scan.
Treatment of Addison's disease involves replacing, or substituting, the hormones the adrenal glands are not making. Cortisol is replaced orally with hydrocortisone tablets, and aldosterone is replaced with oral doses of a mineralocorticoid called fludrocortisone acetate (Florinef).
People with Addison's may wish to wear a descriptive warning bracelet or neck chain to alert emergency personnel.
