

Tonsillitis and Adnoiditis Symptoms, Pictures, Causes, and Home Treatment Center
Anatomy of a Sore Throat Slideshow
Take the Strep Throat Quiz
Sinusitis (Sinus Infection) Slideshow Pictures
Patient Comments: Tonsillitis - Symptoms and Signs
Patient Comments: Tonsillitis - Diagnosis
Patient Comments: Tonsillitis - Treatment
Patient Comments: Tonsillitis - Snoring and Other Causes
Find a local Ear, Nose, & Throat Doctor in your town
Tonsillitis and adenoid infection definition and facts
What are the tonsils and adenoids? What do they do?
What are the signs and symptoms of tonsillitis or adenoid infections?
What does tonsillitis look like 
(pictures)?
Is tonsillitis contagious?
What causes tonsillitis and adenoid infections?
How are tonsillitis and adenoid infections diagnosed?
What medical treatments (antibiotics) cure tonsillitis and adenoid infections?
What natural or home remedies help soothe tonsillitis pain and inflammation?
When should the tonsils and/or adenoids be removed 
(tonsillectomy or adenoidectomy)?
Which specialties of doctors treat tonsillitis and adenoid infections?

            
            Share Your Story
        
Tonsils and adenoids are composed of tissues similar to the lymph nodes or glands.
Acute tonsillitis is an infection of the tonsils caused by one of several types of bacteria or viruses.
Chronic tonsillitis is a persistent infection of the tonsils and can cause tonsil stone formation.
Signs and symptoms of tonsil or adenoid infection include:Sore throatFeverBad breathDifficulty swallowingSwollen lymph glands in the front of the neck
Sore throat
Fever
Bad breath
Difficulty swallowing
Swollen lymph glands in the front of the neck
Peritonsillar abscess is a collection of pus behind the tonsils.
Obstruction to breathing by enlarged tonsils and adenoids may cause snoring and disturbed sleep patterns.
Bacterial infections of the tonsils and adenoids are treated with antibiotics, viral infections are not.
Tonsillitis and adenoid infections are diagnosed with a history and physical exam. A throat culture and rapid strep test may be ordered in cases of tonsillitis suspected to be bacterial.
Tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy (surgical removal of the tonsils) may be recommended: (1) for repeated or persistent infections; (2) when serious complications of infection occur; and (3) when enlargement of the tonsils and adenoids causes breathing, swallowing, or dental problems.
