



Alopecia areata is an acquired skin disease that can affect all hair-bearing skin and is characterized by localized areas of non-scarring alopecia (hair loss). Alopecia areata is occasionally associated with other medical problems. Most often these bald areas regrow their hair spontaneously.
Alopecia areata is rare before 3 years of age. There seems to be a significant inherited predisposition for the development of alopecia areata.


Current evidence suggests that alopecia areata is caused by an abnormality in the immune system that damages hair follicles. This particular abnormality leads to autoimmunity, a misguided immune system that tends to attack its own body. As a result, the immune system attacks particular tissues of the body. In alopecia areata, for unknown reasons, the body's own immune system attacks the hair follicles and disrupts normal hair formation. Biopsies of affected skin show immune lymphocytes penetrating into the hair bulb of the hair follicles. Alopecia areata is occasionally associated with other autoimmune conditions such as thyroid disease, vitiligo, lupus, rheumatoid arthritis, and ulcerative colitis. The diagnosis or treatment of these diseases is unlikely to affect the course of alopecia areata. Sometimes, alopecia areata occurs within family members, suggesting a role of genes.
Alopecia Areata Center
Hair Loss Slideshow Pictures
Hair and Scalp Slideshow Pictures
Take the Hair Loss Quiz!
Patient Comments: Alopecia Areata - Effective Treatments
Patient Comments: Alopecia Areata - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Alopecia Areata - Patterns
Find a local Dermatologist in your town
Alopecia areata facts
What is alopecia areata?
What causes alopecia areata?
What are the signs and symptoms of the different patterns of alopecia areata?
Who is affected by alopecia areata?
How do health care professionals diagnose alopecia areata?
What is the treatment for alopecia areata?
Alopecia areata is peculiar form of hair loss that usually affects the scalp but can occur on any hair-bearing skin.
Alopecia areata produces one or more patches of balding without any obvious change in the texture of the affected skin, a non-scarring alopecia.
Alopecia areata affects males and females.
It is thought to be an autoimmune disorder, in which hair follicles, are damaged by a misguided immune system.
For most patients, the condition resolves without treatment within a year, but hair loss is sometimes permanent.
Many treatments are known to aid in hair regrowth. Multiple treatments may be necessary, and none consistently work for all patients.
