

Appendicitis Symptoms, Signs, Pain, Tests, Surgery, and Treatment Center
Appendicitis & Appendectomy Slideshow Pictures
Medical Illustrations of Appendix
Take the Appendicitis Quiz
Appendicitis FAQs
Patient Comments: Appendicitis - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Appendicitis  - Treatments
Patient Comments: Appendicitis - Causes
Patient Comments: Appendicitis - Appendectormy Surgery
Patient Comments: Appendicitis - Complications
Find a local Doctor in your town
Appendicitis definition and facts
What is the appendix? Do you need it?
What is appendicitis? What causes it?
What are the signs and symptoms of appendicitis? Is it painful?
What does appendicitis look like (pictures)?
What tests diagnose appendicitis?
What happens if the appendix ruptures?
What is the treatment for appendicitis? Is surgery necessary?
What is an appendectomy (surgery)?
What is the recovery time for an appendectomy (surgery)?
What is confined appendicitis?
What is "stump appendicitis?"
What procedures diagnose appendicitis?
Why is it difficult to diagnose appendicitis?
What are the complications of appendicitis? Can they be life-threatening?
Which specialties of doctors treat appendicitis?
What other conditions can mimic appendicitis?
What are the complications of appendectomy?
Are there long-term consequences of appendectomy?
What is new about appendicitis?
The appendix is a small, worm-like, tubular appendage attached to the cecum of the colon.
Appendicitis is caused by the blockage of the appendix followed by invasion of bacteria of the wall of the appendix. 
The most common complications of appendicitis are rupture, abscess, and peritonitis.
The most common signs and symptoms of appendicitis in adults and children areabdominal pain,loss of appetite,nausea and vomiting,fever, andabdominal tenderness.
abdominal pain,
loss of appetite,
nausea and vomiting,
fever, and
abdominal tenderness.
Appendicitis usually is suspected on the basis of a patient's history and physical examination; however, a white blood cell count, urinalysis, abdominal X-ray, barium enema, ultrasonography, computerized tomography (CT) scan, and laparoscopy also may be helpful in diagnosis.
Due to the varying size and location of the appendix and the proximity of other organs to the appendix, it may be difficult to differentiate appendicitis from other abdominal and pelvic diseases or even during the onset of labor during pregnancy.
The treatment for appendicitis usually is antibiotics and appendectomy (surgery to remove the appendix).
Complications of appendectomy include wound infection and abscess.
Other conditions that can mimic appendicitis include celicac disese Meckel's diverticulitis, pelvic inflammatory disease (PID), inflammatory diseases of the right upper abdomen (gallbladder disease, liver disease, or perforated duodenal ulcer), right-sided diverticulitis, ectopic pregnancy, kidney diseases, and Crohn's disease of the terminal ileum.
