



The prostate is a small organ about the size of a walnut. It lies below the bladder (where urine is stored) and surrounds the urethra (the tube that carries urine from the bladder). The prostate makes a fluid that helps to nourish sperm as part of the semen (ejaculatory fluid).
Prostate problems are common in men 50 and older. Most can be treated successfully without harming sexual function.


Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) is nonmalignant (noncancerous) enlargement of the prostate gland, a common occurrence in older men. It is also known as benign prostatic hyperplasia and abbreviated as BPH. It's also referred to as and enlarged prostate gland.


BPH generally begins in a man's 30s, evolves slowly, and most commonly only causes symptoms after 50.


BPH is extremely common. Advanced age is a risk factor for an enlarged prostate. Half of all men over 50 develop symptoms of benign prostatic hyperplasia, but only 10% need medical or surgical intervention.


In benign prostatic hyperplasia, the prostate gland grows in size. It may compress the urethra which courses through the center of the prostate. This can impede the flow of urine from the bladder through the urethra to the outside. It can cause urine to back up in the bladder (retention) leading to the need to urinate frequently during the day and night.
Other common symptoms include a slow flow of urine, the need to urinate urgently and difficulty starting the urinary stream. More serious problems include urinary tract infections and complete blockage of the urethra, which may be a medical emergency and can lead injury to the kidneys.


No! BPH is completely benign. It is not a precursor (a forerunner) to prostate cancer.


A doctor or other health care professional usually can detect an enlarged prostate by rectal examination. The doctor also may examine the urethra, prostate, and bladder using a cytoscope, an instrument that is inserted through the penis or with ultrasound.


A urologist is a specialist in diseases of the urinary system, including diagnosing and treating problems of the prostate gland.



Watchful waiting often is chosen by men who are not bothered by symptoms of BPH. They have no treatment except to get regular checkups and wait to see whether or not the condition gets worse. Medical treatment of enlarged prostate is usually reserved for men with significant symptoms.
Enlarged Prostate Gland (BPH, Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia) Symptoms, Causes, and Treatments Center
Enlarged Prostate (BPH) Pictures Slideshow
Prostate Cancer Slideshow Pictures
Take the Enlarged Prostate Quiz!
Enlarged Prostate (BPH) FAQs
Patient Comments: BPH (Enlarged Prostate) -  Symptoms
Patient Comments: BPH (Enlarged Prostate) -  Medical Treatments
Patient Comments: BPH (Enlarged Prostate) -  Diagnosis and Experience
Find a local Urologist in your town
Enlarged prostate (BPH) definition and facts
What is the prostate gland?
What is benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH)?
At what age do men develop the condition?
How common is the condition?  Are there any risk factors?
What happens in BPH? What are the signs and symptoms?
Is BPH a type of cancer?
What procedures or tests diagnose this prostate problem?
Which specialties of doctors treat the problem?
Are there natural or home remedies to treat BPH or enlarged prostate?
Medications and surgery procedures to treat BPH
Are there other non-cancerous prostate problems?
Can prostate problems be prevented?

            
            Share Your Story
        
The prostate gland produces a fluid that becomes part of the semen.
Benign prostatic hyperplasia, or BPH, involves enlargement of the prostate gland.
The prostate enlargement in benign prostatic hyperplasia is not malignant (not cancer).
BPH can impede the flow of urine.
Symptoms include frequent urge to urinate, getting up at night to urinate, difficulty urinating and dribbling of urine.
The treatment of benign prostatic hyperplasia is usually reserved for patients with significant symptoms.
Medical and surgical approaches are available to treat BPH.

            
            Readers Comments 3
        

            
            Share Your Story
        

            
            Readers Comments 5
        

            
            Share Your Story
        

            
            Readers Comments 6
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
