

The bladder is a hollow muscular organ that is located in the pelvis. The bladder has two functions: one is to store urine and the other is to release/expel urine. Urine drains from the kidneys (one on each side of the body), down the ureters (one on each side of the body), and into the bladder. The urine is stored in the bladder where it remains until urination. When it is time to urinate, the bladder muscle contracts and the outlet of the bladder and sphincter muscles relax to allow urine to pass through the urethra to leave the body. The bladder and urethra are part of the lower urinary tract, whereas the kidneys and ureters are part of the upper urinary tract.


Cystitis is inflammation of the bladder. Most cystitis is from bacterial infections involving the bladder and less commonly may be due to other infectious diseases, including yeast infections, viral infections, or the result of other causes such as chemical irritants of the bladder, or for unknown reasons (interstitial cystitis). Bladder infection (infectious cystitis) is a type of urinary tract infection (UTI). Other forms of urinary tract infection include pyelonephritis (kidney infection/inflammation), urethritis (infection/inflammation of the urethra), and prostatitis (inflammation/infection of the prostate gland). This review will specifically address infectious cystitis.
The urine in the bladder is normally free of bacteria (sterile). However, bacteria may be present in the bladder but not cause inflammation or symptoms of an infection. This is asymptomatic bacteriuria, not cystitis. Asymptomatic bacteriuria is bacteria in the urine that does not cause symptoms. It is important to differentiate asymptomatic bacteriuria from cystitis, to prevent overuse of antibiotics. Most people with asymptomatic bacteriuria do not require antibiotics. In fact, the guidelines for the Infectious Disease Society of America recommend only treating asymptomatic bacteriuria in pregnant women or immediately before urologic procedures.
Cystitis can be complicated or uncomplicated. Uncomplicated cystitis is a bladder infection in a healthy person with a structurally and functionally normal urinary tract. A complicated bladder infection is one that occurs in association with factors that increase the chance of developing a bacterial infection and decrease the chance of antibiotic therapy being effective. Such abnormalities include obstruction from stones, congenital blockages, urethral strictures, and prostate enlargement.
Bladder Infection (Cystitis) Center
Take the UTI Quiz
Urinary Tract Infection (UTI) Slideshow Pictures
Urinary Incontinence in Women Slideshow Pictures
Patient Comments: Bladder Infection - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Bladder Infection - Treatment
Patient Comments: Bladder Infection - Children
Patient Comments: Bladder Infection - Prevention
Find a local Doctor in your town
What is the bladder?
What is a bladder infection?
What causes bladder infections?
What are some risk factors for bladder infection?
What are the signs and symptoms of a bladder infection in women?
What are the signs and symptoms of a bladder infection in men?
What are the signs and symptoms of a bladder infection in children?
How do health care professionals diagnose a bladder infection?
What are treatment options and medications for a bladder infection?
Are home remedies effective for a bladder infection?
What is the treatment for a bladder infection during pregnancy?
What are potential complications of a bladder infection?
Is it possible to prevent bladder infections?
What is the prognosis for a bladder infection?
