

Bones make up the skeleton of the body. They allow us the ability to interact 
with our environment and lift out body up against gravity. Bones are attachment 
points for muscles which allows us to run, jump, sit, kneel, grasp, and 
lift. Bones also protect organs from potential damage, and the bone marrow (tissue inside of bones) is responsible for blood cell production.
Bones are the body's storage area for calcium. On a cellular level, calcium 
is always entering and exiting bone under the influence of the body's hormones. 
Parathyroid hormone increases calcium levels in the bloodstream, meaning, that it 
regulates it's release by bone and decreasing bone density. Calcitonin decreases 
blood calcium levels and helps restore calcium to bone. Calcium is needed in the 
blood stream to help muscle cells including the heart to function. Hormone 
levels will sacrifice calcium in bone to maintain blood calcium levels in a 
normal range. For that reason, 
calcium and Vitamin D are important to maintain 
calcium stores in the body.


When a bone has an outside force exerted upon it, like a blow or a fall, 
there is potential that it cannot withstand the amount of force and it 
breaks. That loss of integrity results in a fracture. It is important to 
remember that a fracture, break, or crack all describe the same situation, an 
injury to the bone where it has been damaged. One term is not more serious than 
another. Fracture, break, and crack all mean the same thing.
Depending upon the situation, the amount of force required may not be very 
great. People with osteoporosis, the bones 
lack calcium and are brittle, a minor injury or even gravity may create enough of a 
force to cause a vertebral compression fracture of the back or a hip fracture.

Broken Bone (Types of Bone Fractures) Center
First Aid Essentials Slideshow
Take the Trauma and First Aid Quiz
First Aid Sprains & Strains Slideshow Pictures
Patient Comments: Broken Bone - Cause
Patient Comments: Broken Bone - Signs and Symptoms
Patient Comments: Broken Bone - Surgery
Find a local Doctor in your town
What is a broken bone (fracture)?
What causes a broken bone?
What are the most 	common types of broken bones?
Compression fracture
Skull fracture
Stress fracture
What are the most 
	common bones that are broken?
Broken hand or fingers
Broken wrist
Broken hip
Broken leg
Broken toe
Broken shoulder
What are the signs and symptoms of a broken bone?
When should I call a doctor if I think I have broken a bone?
How is a broken bone diagnosed?
What is the treatment for a broken bone?
What about surgery for a broken bone?
How can fractures be prevented?
What is the prognosis for a broken bone?

            
            Share Your Story
        

            
            Read Doctor's View
        

            
            Readers Comments 5
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
