

Bronchiectasis (pronounced as brong-ke-EK-tah-sis and derived from the Greek bronkhia meaning branches of the lung's main bronchi plus the Greek word ektasis meaning dilation) is the abnormal widening of the bronchi or their branches that usually causes an increased risk for infection.


Bronchiectasis is a condition in which the bronchial tubes in the lung become damaged from inflammation or other causes and the smooth muscles of the bronchial tubes are destroyed. In addition, elasticity of the bronchi is often lost. Bronchiectasis may be acquired or have a genetic origin. Many clinicians consider bronchiectasis to be a form of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD); it includes chronic bronchitis and emphysema.


The signs and symptoms of bronchiectasis develop and change over time. The first common symptoms include a recurrent cough and sputum production; usually the sputum/mucous is clear but eventually may become bloody if injuries to the bronchial wall occur. In addition, mucous may change to a green or yellow color when infection is present. As the disease progresses, chronic coughing with mucous production increases and the person usually becomes more fatigued and short of breath as lung function decreases. Some people may develop wheezing; some may lose weight due to the increased effort needed to breathe. Occasionally, symptoms of a primary disease like pneumonia may mask some of the symptoms of bronchiectasis so it may be more difficult to diagnose bronchiectasis if an underlying disease is present.
Bronchiectasis Symptoms, Causes, Complications, and Life Expectancy Center
Understanding COPD Slideshow
COPD (Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease) Quiz
Energy Foods for COPD Slideshow Pictures
Patient Comments: Bronchiectasis - Experience
Patient Comments: Bronchiectasis - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Bronchiectasis - Treatments
Patient Comments: Bronchiectasis - Cause
Patient Comments: Bronchiectasis - Types
Find a local Doctor in your town
What is the definition of bronchiectasis?
What is bronchiectasis?
What are the signs and symptoms of bronchiectasis?
What causes bronchiectasis?
What are the types of bronchiectasis?
Who is at risk for bronchiectasis?
When should I contact my doctor for bronchiectasis?
How is the diagnosis of bronchiectasis made?
Can bronchiectasis be prevented?
What is the prognosis of bronchiectasis?
What is the treatment for bronchiectasis?

            
            Readers Comments 1
        

            
            Share Your Story
        

            
            Readers Comments 4
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
