



Bronchitis is a term that describes inflammation of the bronchial tubes (bronchi and the smaller branches termed bronchioles) that results in excessive secretions of mucus into the tubes, leading to tissue swelling that can narrow or close off bronchial tubes. Bronchial tubes extend from the trachea and terminate at the alveoli in the lungs. The bronchial system resembles an inverted tree and is sometimes termed the "bronchial tree." A few authors include the trachea and upper airway in the definition of bronchitis.
There are two major types of bronchitis, acute and chronic. Chronic bronchitis differs from acute bronchitis in several ways, for example, pathology, progression of disease, major causes, treatments, and prognosis. Recurrent incidences of acute bronchitis are the first steps that can lead to developing chronic bronchitis, according to some doctors and researchers.
Chronic Bronchitis Symptoms, Signs, Causes, Treatment, and Natural Remedies Center
Understanding COPD Slideshow
COPD (Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease) Quiz
Energy Foods for COPD Slideshow Pictures
Bronchitis FAQs
Patient Comments: Chronic Bronchitis - Treatments
Patient Comments: Bronchitis - Experience 
Patient Comments: Chronic Bronchitis - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Acute Bronchitis - Symptoms
Find a local Pulmonologist in your town
Chronic bronchitis definition and facts
What is bronchitis?
What is acute bronchitis? What are the  symptoms of acute bronchitis?
What is chronic bronchitis?
What are the signs and symptoms of chronic bronchitis?
What are the causes of chronic bronchitis?
When should you see a doctor for chronic bronchitis?
How is chronic bronchitis diagnosed?
What is the treatment for chronic bronchitis?
What medications treat chronic bronchitis? What are other medical treatments?
What natural remedies treat chronic bronchitis symptoms?
What are the complications of chronic bronchitis?
What is the prognosis for chronic bronchitis?
Can chronic bronchitis be prevented?
Bronchitis is a term that describes inflammation of the bronchial tubes (bronchi and the smaller branches termed bronchioles) that results in excessive secretions of mucus into the tubes with tissue swelling that may narrow or close off bronchial tubes.
Chronic bronchitis is defined as a cough that occurs every day with sputum production that lasts for at least 3 months, 2 years in a row.
The major cause of chronic bronchitis is cigarette smoking; other causes are bronchial irritants, usually inhaled repeatedly by the affected person.
Ideally, people should seek medical care before chronic bronchitis develops.
Patient history and physical exams help diagnose chronic bronchitis, while other tests such as chest X-rays, pulmonary function tests, and CT imaging studies may also be used.
Treatment of most people with chronic bronchitis is to quit cigarette smoking and avoid air-borne bronchial irritants; medical treatments include bronchodilators, steroids, and oxygen therapy.
The major complications of chronic bronchitis are severe shortness of breath, COPD, respiratory failure, and an increased mortality rate.
Risk factors for chronic bronchitis include smoking, exposure to airborne chemicals and secondhand smoke, dust, and other bronchial irritants.
A majority of cases of chronic bronchitis can be prevented by not smoking and avoiding secondhand smoke. Avoidance of air-borne bronchial irritants, vaccinations, and asthma prevention may help prevent bouts of chronic bronchitis.
Although the disease is chronic and progressive, patients that are diagnosed early before much bronchial damage occurs and who stop smoking (or avoid airborne dust, chemicals or other situations that lead to bronchial irritation) often have a good prognosis for many years.
To potentially avoid developing chronic bronchitis, seek treatment for tobacco addiction and the occasional chronic cough (less than daily for 3 months). If you have chronic bronchitis seek care for severe dyspnea, cyanosis, and fever immediately.
