

Colon Cancer (Colorectal Cancer) Center
Colorectal (Colon) Cancer Slideshow Pictures
Colorectal (Colon) Cancer Quiz: Test Your Medical IQ
Picture of Colon Cancer
Patient Comments: Colon Cancer - Diagnosis
Patient Comments: Colon Cancer - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Colon Cancer - Treatment
Patient Comments: Colon Cancer - Life Change
Find a local Oncologist in your town
Colon cancer facts
What is cancer?
What is the colon, and what does it do?
Where is the colon located?
How long is the human colon?
What is colorectal cancer?
What are the causes and risk factors of colon cancer?
What are the signs and symptoms of colon cancer?
What tests can be done to detect and diagnose colon cancer?
What are the stages of colon cancer?
What are the treatments for colon cancer?
What is the follow-up care for colon cancer?
What is the prognosis for patients with colorectal cancer?
What are colon cancer survival rates?
Is it possible to prevent colon cancer?

            
            Share Your Story
        
Colorectal cancer is a malignant tumor arising from the inner wall of the large intestine (colon) or rectum.
Colorectal cancer is the third leading cause of cancer in both men and women in the U.S.
Common risk factors for colorectal cancer include increasing age, African-American race, a family history of colorectal cancer, colon polyps, and long-standing ulcerative colitis.
Most colorectal cancers develop from polyps. Removal of colon polyps can aid in the prevention of colorectal cancer.
Colon polyps and early cancer may have no cancer-specific early signs or symptoms. Therefore, regular colorectal cancer screening is important.
Diagnosis of colorectal cancer can be made by sigmoidoscopy or by colonoscopy with biopsy confirmation of cancerous tissue.
Treatment of colorectal cancer depends on the location, size, and extent of cancer spread, as well as the health of the patient.
Surgery is the most common medical treatment for colorectal cancer.
Early-stage colorectal cancers are typically treatable by surgery alone.
Chemotherapy can extend life and improve quality of life for those who have had or are living with metastatic colorectal cancer. It can also reduce the risk of recurrence in patients found to have high-risk colon cancer findings at surgery.
