

COPD (Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease) Symptoms, Causes, Stages and Life Expectancy Center
Understanding COPD Slideshow
COPD (Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease) Quiz
Energy Foods for COPD Slideshow Pictures
COPD (Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease) FAQs
Patient Comments: COPD - Symptoms
Patient Comments: COPD - Causes
Patient Comments: COPD - Treatment
Patient Comments: COPD - Experience
Find a local Pulmonologist in your town
COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease) definition and facts
What is chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)?
What are the signs and symptoms of COPD?
What are the four stages of COPD?
What causes COPD?
What are the risk factors for developing COPD?
What tests diagnosis COPD?
What is the treatment for COPD?
What medications treat COPD?
What is the treatment for COPD exacerbation?
What surgery is available to treat COPD?
What is the prognosis and life expectancy for a person with COPD?
What lifestyle changes (diet, exercise) and home therapies help COPD symptoms?
When to call your doctor for COPD
Can COPD be prevented?
Which types of doctors treat COPD?
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a chronic condition in which there is a slow, progressive obstruction of airflow into or out of the lungs.
The Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) defines chronic obstructive pulmonary disease as airflow limitation that is not fully reversible, usually is progressive, and is associated with an abnormal inflammatory response of the lungs to inhaled noxious particles or gases. This information will focus on chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and not on other related problems (for example, chronic bronchitis or asthma).
Symptoms of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease includecough,chest discomfort,shortness of breath, andwheezing.
cough,
chest discomfort,
shortness of breath, and
wheezing.
Progressive or more serious symptoms may includerespiratory distress,tachypnea,cyanosis,use of accessory respiratory muscles,peripheral edema,hyperinflation,chronic wheezing,abnormal lung sounds,prolonged expiration,elevated jugular venous pulse, andcyanosis.
respiratory distress,
tachypnea,
cyanosis,
use of accessory respiratory muscles,
peripheral edema,
hyperinflation,
chronic wheezing,
abnormal lung sounds,
prolonged expiration,
elevated jugular venous pulse, and
cyanosis.
The primary cause of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease is cigarette smoking and/or exposure to tobacco smoke. Other causes include air pollution, infectious diseases, and genetic conditions. The risk factors of COPD is increased by smoking tobacco, secondhand smoke, air pollution, alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency and a few other conditions.Chronic bronchitis, emphysema, asthma, and infectious diseases can contribute to the development of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
The stages of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease range from stage I to stage IV. As the stage number increases, the disease progressively becomes worse; stage IV is also known as "end stage" chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
The diagnosis of this COPD is by taking the patient's breathing history and exposure to irritants such as cigarette smoking or other agents. A pulmonologist usually determines the stage of COPD by their FEV1 level.
The treatment for this health condition includes avoiding any of the risks and causes of COPD such as cigarette smoke or toxic fumes, medications, or in a small number of patients, lung surgery or lung transplant.
Medical treatments for COPD include medications to stop smoking, various bronchodilators, anticholinergics, steroids, and enzyme inhibitors.
Other therapies for this health condition may include antibiotics, mucolytic agents, oxygen, endurance exercises, and yoga.
Surgery for COPD may include bullectomy, lung volume reduction, or lung transplant.
The prognosis and life expectancy for individuals with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease ranges from good to poor, depending on the person's COPD stage, with a decreasing outlook as the stages progress toward stage IV.
Individuals with COPD should contact their health-care professional before treating themselves with home remedies (for example, vitamins, antioxidants, omega-3 fatty acids).
Prevention or lowering the risk factors for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease includes avoiding the causes and irritants (for example, smoking) or vaccines that protect the lungs from infection (for example, the flu and pneumococcal vaccines).
Depending upon the stage of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, other doctors besides the patient's primary care physician may be involved and may include pulmonologists, lung surgeons, and/or other professionals such as pulmonary rehabilitation specialists and other team members.Individuals should contact their doctors about COPD if they experience any of the signs or symptoms of COPD.
