

The cornea is the clear tissue at the front and center of the eye. Its transparency permits light to pass into the eye, through the pupil, lens, and onto the retina at the back of the eye. The three major corneal layers are the outer layer of the cornea or epithelial layer, the middle layer termed the stroma, and finally a single layer of cells called the endothelium.
The curvature of the cornea plays an important role in focusing (refracting or bending) light. The normal cornea is smooth, clear, and tough. It helps protect the eye from infection and foreign material.


There are several common causes of corneal disease, including the following:
The cornea can also be damaged secondarily by other common eye conditions such as tear film abnormalities (dry eye), eyelid disorders, glaucoma, and iridocorneal endothelial syndrome (ICE), which may be associated with glaucoma.
Corneal Disease Center
Eye Diseases Pictures Slideshow 
Pink Eye Slideshow Pictures
Eyes and Eye Conditions Quiz
Patient Comments: Corneal Disease - Symptoms and Signs
Patient Comments: Corneal Disease - Describe Experience
Patient Comments: Corneal Disease - Diagnosis
Find a local Eye Doctor in your town
What is the cornea?
What are the different types of corneal disease?
What are the causes and risk factors of corneal disease?
What are the signs and symptoms of corneal disease?
What types of health care specialists diagnose and treat corneal disease?
How do health care professionals diagnose corneal disease?
What is the treatment for corneal disease?
What are the potential complications of corneal disease?
Is it possible to prevent corneal disease?

            
            Readers Comments 2
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
InfectionsBacterial, fungal, or viral keratitis, as well as parasitic diseases
Bacterial, fungal, or viral keratitis, as well as parasitic diseases
TraumaAbrasions or exposure to toxic chemicals
Abrasions or exposure to toxic chemicals
Dystrophies and degenerative corneal disordersFuchs' dystrophy, map-dot-fingerprint dystrophy, or lattice corneal dystrophy
Fuchs' dystrophy, map-dot-fingerprint dystrophy, or lattice corneal dystrophy
Autoimmune disordersWegener's disease, rheumatoid arthritis, or lupus
Wegener's disease, rheumatoid arthritis, or lupus
Nutritional deficienciesVitamin A deficiency
Vitamin A deficiency
AllergiesVernal and atopic keratoconjunctivitis
Vernal and atopic keratoconjunctivitis
GrowthsPterygium or benign or malignant cancerous growths on the eye's surface
Pterygium or benign or malignant cancerous growths on the eye's surface
Ectasia (thinning)Keratoconus, or thinning of the cornea following refractive laser surgery
Keratoconus, or thinning of the cornea following refractive laser surgery
Stevens-Johnson syndrome, a rare but serious inflammatory reaction to a medication or an infection
