



The first step in the care of cuts, scrapes (abrasions) is to stop the bleeding. Most wounds respond to direct pressure with a clean cloth or bandage. Hold the pressure continuously for approximately 10 
to 20 minutes. If this fails to stop the bleeding or if bleeding is rapid, seek medical assistance.

Next, thoroughly clean the wound with soap and water.   Remove any foreign material 
in the wound, such as dirt, or bits of grass, which may lead to infection. Tweezers 
can be used (clean them with alcohol first) to remove foreign material from the wound edges, but do not dig into the wound as this may push bacteria deeper into the wound 
or injure subcutaneous (under the skin) structures.  
The wound may also be gently scrubbed with a washcloth to remove dirt and debris.  Hydrogen peroxide and povidone-iodine (Betadine) products may be used to clean the wound initially, but may inhibit wound healing if used long-term.

Cover the area with a bandage (such as gauze or a Band-Aid) to help prevent infection and dirt from getting in the wound. A first aid antibiotic ointment 
(Bacitracin, Neosporin, Polysporin) can be applied to help prevent infection and keep the wound moist.

Continued care to the wound is also important. Three times a day, wash the area gently with soap and water, apply an antibiotic ointment, and 
re-cover with a bandage.  Change the bandage immediately if it gets dirty or wet.

Cuts, Scrapes (Abrasions), and Puncture Wounds Center
First Aid Sprains & Strains Slideshow Pictures
First Aid Essentials Slideshow
Take the Trauma and First Aid Quiz
Patient Comments: Cuts, Scrapes and Puncture Wounds - Experience
Patient Comments: Cuts, Scrapes and Puncture Wounds - Medical Care
Patient Comments: Cuts, Scrapes and Puncture Wounds - Infection
Cuts, scrapes (abrasions), and puncture wounds facts
What is the best first aid for a cut or scrape?
Who should seek medical care for a cut?
What are the signs and symptoms of a wound infection?
How are puncture wounds different?
Will I need a tetanus shot for a cut, scrape, or puncture wound?

            
            Readers Comments 4
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
Washing a cut or scrape with soap, and water and keeping it clean and dry is all that is required to care for most wounds.
Cleaning the wound with hydrogen peroxide and iodine is acceptable initially, but can delay healing and should be avoided long-term.
Apply antibiotic ointment and keep the wound covered.
Seek medical care within 6 hours if the bleeding does not stop, as the wound might need stitches.
A delay can increase the rate of wound infection.
Any puncture wound through tennis shoes or sneakers has a high risk of infection and should be seen by a doctor.
Any redness, swelling, increased pain, fever, red streaking, or pus draining from the wound may indicate an infection that requires medical care.

            
            Share Your Story
        
