



Cystinuria is an inherited (genetic) disorder of the transport of an amino acid (a building block of protein) called cystine resulting in cystinuria (an excess of cystine in the urine) and the formation of cystine stones.


Cystinuria is one of the more common genetic disorders. Its overall prevalence is about 1 in 7,000 in the population.
Cystinuria is the most common defect known in the transport of an amino acid.


Within the body, many molecules are able to pass across the membranes that surround cells. These molecules can accomplish this feat due to specific transport systems. These systems include special receptors on the membrane of the cell and special carrier proteins. The receptor recognizes the molecule and receives it on the cell membrane. Then the molecule hitches a ride through the cell membrane on the back of a carrier protein.
With such remarkable specificity, it is little wonder that sometimes there are defects in transport systems.  Several dozen different diseases are now known to be due to transport defects.
Cystinuria Center
Kidney Stones Slideshow Pictures
Picture of Kidney Stone Crystal
Pelvic Pain Pictures Slideshow
Patient Comments: Cystinuria - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Cystinuria - Treatment
Cystinuria facts
What is cystinuria?
How frequent is cystinuria?
What is a transport defect?
What causes cystinuria?
What happens with cystine in the urine?
What problem do the cystine stones cause?
What happens with a urinary obstruction?
What is the effect of urinary obstruction on the kidney?
What are the signs and symptoms of cystinuria?
What use is early diagnosis?
How is cystinuria treated?
What are the laboratory findings in cystinuria?
How is cystinuria inherited?
How long has cystinuria been known?
Cystinuria is a relatively common inherited disorder.
The disorder is due to a defect in the transport of  amino acids including one called cystine.
Cystinuria features too much cystine in the urine.
Cystine is highly insoluble, precipitates out of solution and forms stones in the urine.
All the signs and symptoms of cystinuria are due to  the stones.
The stones cause blood in the urine, pain, and  obstruction and infection of the urinary tract.
The foremost aim of treatment is to prevent the  formation of cystine stones.
Cystine stones can often be dissolved and new ones  prevented by a high fluid intake.
People with cystinuria should understand that "for them, water is a necessary drug."
