



7 DVT (Blood Clot in the Legs) Symptoms, Signs, and Treatment Guidelines Center
Deep Vein Thrombosis Slideshow Pictures
Take the DVT and PE Quiz
Spider & Varicose Veins Pictures Slideshow 
Deep Vein Thrombosis and Pulmonary Embolism FAQs
Patient Comments: Deep Vein Thrombosis - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Deep Vein Thrombosis  - Diagnosis
Patient Comments: Deep Vein Thrombosis - Treatment
Patient Comments: Deep Vein Thrombosis - Prevention
Patient Comments: Deep Vein Thrombosis - Possible Causes
Find a local Cardiologist in your town
Deep vein thrombosis (DVT) definition and facts
What does DVT look like (picture)?
What is deep vein thrombosis (DVT)?
7 early warning signs and symptoms of DVT
What are the signs and symptoms of superficial blood clots?
What causes DVT?
What are the risk factors for DVT?
What tests diagnose DVT?
What are the treatment and management guidelines for DVT? Does it go away?
What is the treatment of superficial blood clots?
What are the side effects and risks of anticoagulation therapy?
8 medications used for the treatment of DVT
Warfarin (Coumadin, Jantoven)
Does DVT require surgery?
What are the complications of DVT?
Can DVT be prevented?
Which types of doctors treat DVT?
There are both superficial and deep veins in the limbs or extremities (arms and legs). A blood clot in the deep veins is a concern because it can cause life-threatening complications.
A blood clot (thrombus) in the deep venous system of the leg becomes dangerous if a piece of the blood clot breaks off or travels through the blood stream, through the heart, and into the pulmonary arteries forming a pulmonary embolism. A person may not have signs or symptoms of a small pulmonary embolism (blood clot in the lungs), but a large embolism can be fatal.
Risk factors for blood clot formation include immobility, a genetic tendency toward blood clotting, and injury to veins or adjacent tissues occurs.
Symptoms of DVT or blood clot in the leg include:PainSwellingWarmthTendernessRedness of the leg or arm
Pain
Swelling
Warmth
Tenderness
Redness of the leg or arm
Doctors diagnose the condition is with blood tests, and then is confirmed by ultrasound or other imaging tests.
Treatment of typically involves taking blood thinning medications (anticoagulants) unless you cannot take them (contraindicated). In that situation, an inferior vena cava filter is potentially considered.
Complications of DVT include pulmonary embolism (PE) and post-phlebitic syndrome.
There are other types of thrombosis such as:Cerebral venous thrombosis (CVT)Portal vein thrombosisCavernous sinus thrombosis
Cerebral venous thrombosis (CVT)
Portal vein thrombosis
Cavernous sinus thrombosis
