

Allergic reactions are the hyper-immune response of our immune system to foreign (antigenic) substances. When certain foreign substances are introduced to the body, the immune system is triggered. (The immune system protects us from substances that may harm the body.) A hyper-immune response may result in allergic reaction symptoms. Medications are foreign substances and some of their components may trigger the immune systems of some people.


Drug allergic reactions are similar to allergic reactions resulting from food and other substances that we ingest. A person's genetic make-up helps determine what they are allergic to, and the severity of their allergies. Allergic reactions, including drug allergy reactions, can be mild, moderate or even deadly.
More serious reactions involve swelling of lips, tongue that can cause difficulty breathing (anaphylaxis) that can lead to death.
Other signs and symptoms of drug allergies include:
Drug allergies may occur at any time during drug treatment. This means that the allergic reaction may occur after the first exposure to the drug or when the drug is taken again in the future.
Allergic reactions are different from common side effects of many drugs such as a headache or upset stomach.


Any drug or a component in a drug can cause an allergic reaction. 
Drugs that most commonly cause allergic reactions include:
Other drugs that may cause an allergic reaction include:
Sometimes the allergic symptoms are caused by a component or substances used for packaging or administering the drug that triggers the allergy. Components of drugs that commonly cause allergies include:


Most times drug allergies are identified based on the time proximity of the 
reaction to administration of the drug and patient history. If the drug is 
stopped and the symptoms also stop; then the logical conclusion is that the drug 
caused the allergic reaction. Skin testing can also be used to verify that the 
drug is causing the allergy. If it is a drug that the patient needs and there 
are no other alternatives, careful skin testing can be done to determine if the 
person is truly allergic to the drug. 


The first step is to stop the drug you suspect is causing the signs and 
symptoms. 
In situations where a drug is needed and there are no alternatives an allergist can attempt to desensitize the individual by gradually giving very small amounts of the drug and increasing the amount over a time.


Contact your doctor if you develop a rash, itching, hives or any symptom related to drug allergy. If your 
lip or tongue swells or if you have shortness of breath go the emergency room immediately. 
Do not drive yourself, call 911.
Drug Allergy (Medication Allergy) Center
10 Common Allergy Triggers Slideshow Pictures
Take the Quiz on Allergies
Nasal Allergy Relief Products Slideshow
Patient Comments: Drug Allergy - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Drug Allergy - Preparedness
Patient Comments: Drug Allergy - Drug Names
Find a local Asthma & Allergy Specialist in your town
Drug allergy definition
What are the signs and symptoms of an allergy to drug (medication) allergy?
To what types of drugs are people most allergic?
Is there a test for drug (medication) allergies?
What is the treatment for a drug 
(medication) allergy?
What should I do if I have an allergic reaction to a drug?

            
            Share Your Story
        

            
            Readers Comments 5
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
Mild drug allergy reactions include:ItchingRashHives
Itching
Rash
Hives
Dizziness
Diarrhea
Nausea
Vomiting
Abdominal cramps
Seizure
Low blood pressure
Fainting

            
            Readers Comments 4
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
Penicillin and related drugs
Sulfa drugs
Insulin
Iodine 

	Chemotherapy drugs
Drugs that suppress the immune system such as rituximab (Rituxan) and abatacept (Orencia)

	HIV medications 
Dyes
Egg proteins
Peanuts
Latex (in the packaging of drugs) 

            
            Share Your Story
        
For skin reactions such as rashes and
	itching antihistamine creams (for example 
	Benadryl) or steroid creams (for example, hydrocortisone) are used. 
	Oral antihistamines and steroids are used for more bothersome symptoms. 
	
Antihistamines injections and or steroids are given for serious allergic reactions. 
	
For life threatening anaphylactic reactions which involve difficulty breathing, epinephrine is given usually intramuscularly.

            
            Readers Comments 2
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
