



Dyslexia has been around for a long time and has been defined in different ways. For example, in 1968, the World Federation of Neurologists defined dyslexia as "a disorder in children who, despite conventional classroom experience, fail to attain the language skills of reading, writing, and spelling commensurate with their intellectual abilities." The International Dyslexia Association offers the following definition of dyslexia:
"Dyslexia is a specific learning disability that is neurobiological in origin. It is characterized by difficulties with accurate and/or fluent word recognition and by poor spelling and decoding abilities. These difficulties typically result from a deficit in the phonological component of language that is often unexpected in relation to other cognitive abilities and the provision of effective classroom instruction. Secondary consequences may include problems in reading comprehension and reduced reading experience that can impede growth of vocabulary and background knowledge."
	
Dyslexia is the most common learning disability in children and persists throughout life. The severity of dyslexia can vary from mild to severe. The sooner dyslexia is treated, the more favorable the outcome. However, it is never too late for people with dyslexia to learn to improve their language skills.
Dyslexia can go undetected in the early grades of schooling. Children can 
become frustrated by the difficulty in learning to read. It is important to note 
that other problems can disguise dyslexia such as a child may:
Dyslexia Center
Brain Foods: Healthy Food for Kids' Brains
Childhood Illnesses Picture Slideshow
Take the ADHD Quiz
Patient Comments: Dyslexia - Describe Your Symptoms
Patient Comments: Dyslexia  - Diagnosis
Patient Comments: Dyslexia - Causes
Patient Comments: Dyslexia - Personal Experience
Patient Comments: Dyslexia - Treatment
Dyslexia facts
What is dyslexia?
What causes dyslexia?
What are the different types of dyslexia?
What are the signs and symptoms of dyslexia?
What should parents or caregivers do if they suspect a child has the signs and symptoms of dyslexia?
What tests diagnose dyslexia?
What type of treatment is available for dyslexia?
What is the prognosis for a person with dyslexia?
More information about dyslexia
Dyslexia is difficulty in learning to read.
Dyslexia can be related to hereditary factors or other factors that affect 
brain development.
The precise cause of dyslexia is not fully understood.
Diagnosis of dyslexia involves reviewing the child's processing of information from seeing, hearing, and participating in activities. 
Treatment of dyslexia ideally involves planning between the parent(s) and the teachers.

            
            Readers Comments 6
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
Show signs of depression and low 
	self-esteem
Have behavior problems at home, as 
	well as at school that often manifest
Become unmotivated and develop a 
	dislike for school, and their success may be jeopardized if the problem 
	remains untreated
