

Indigestion (Dyspepsia, Upset Stomach Pain) Symptoms, Relief Remedies, and Medicine Center
Heartburn Slideshow: Foods to Eat, Foods to Avoid
Digestive Disease Myths
Take the GERD Quiz
Tummy Trouble (Digestive Disorders) FAQs
Patient Comments: Indigestion - Treatments
Patient Comments: Indigestion - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Indigestion - Causes
Patient Comments: Indigestion - Experience
Patient Comments: Indigestion - Complications
Find a local Gastroenterologist in your town
Indigestion definition (dyspepsia, upset stomach) and facts
What is indigestion (dyspepsia, upset stomach)? 
How common is indigestion?
What are the signs and symptoms of indigestion or upset stomach?
Abdominal discomfort and excessive air in the stomach
Is burping (belching) a symptom of indigestion?
How long does indigestion (dyspepsia) last?
What other non-functional GI diseases mimic indigestion? How are they diagnosed?
What causes of indigestion are non-digestive?
Antidepressants for indigestion
Diet and indigestion
Pro-motility medication for indigestion
How do you know if you have indigestion (diagnosis)?
What natural or home remedies are used to treat dyspepsia (indigestion)?
What treatments relieve and cure indigestion (dyspepsia)?
Smooth muscle relaxants for indigestion
Psychological treatments for indigestion
Which specialties of doctors treat indigestion (dyspepsia)?
What are the complications of indigestion (dyspepsia)?
What can a person expect during the diagnosis and treatment of indigestion (prognosis)?
What research is ongoing for treatments to cure indigestion (dyspepsia)?
What is small intestinal bacterial overgrowth (SIBO)?
What endoscopy tests help exclude other diseases?
Indigestion (dyspepsia) is a functional disease in which the gastrointestinal (GI) organs, primarily the stomach and first part of the small intestine (and occasionally the esophagus), function abnormally. It is a chronic disease in which the symptoms fluctuate in frequency and intensity usually over many months or years. It may occur every day or intermittently for days or weeks at a time followed by days or weeks of relief (a pattern referred to as periodicity).
Theories of the cause of indigestion include abnormal input from intestinal sensory nerves, abnormal processing of input from the sensory nerves, and abnormal stimulation of the intestines by motor nerves.
The primary symptoms of indigestion areupper abdominal pain or discomfort,belching,nausea,abdominal bloating,feeling full after eating only a small amount of food (early satiety), abdominal distention (swelling), and occasionally, vomiting.
upper abdominal pain or discomfort,
belching,
nausea,
abdominal bloating,
feeling full after eating only a small amount of food (early satiety), 
abdominal distention (swelling), and 
occasionally, vomiting.
The symptoms most often are provoked by eating.
Indigestion frequently occurs during pregnancy, however, most the time, the symptoms are heartburn caused by acid reflux.
Indigestion is diagnosed on the basis of typical symptoms and the absence of other GI diseases, particularly acid-related diseases (acid indigestion, esophagitis, gastritis, and ulcers), and non-gastrointestinal diseases that might give rise to the symptoms.
Since the heart sits near the stomach, there often is confusion about what is causing lower chest or upper abdominal pain. Therefore, indigestion should be considered in anyone with lower chest pain, and heart attack should be considered in anyone with upper abdominal pain. Occasionally, the discomfort of indigestion can be felt in the back.
Testing in indigestion is directed primarily at excluding the presence of other GI diseases and non-GI diseases. Some people may require specific testing of certain GI functions. It is important to exclude other causes for the indigestion since their treatment will be different from indigestion without a clear cause.
Treatment in indigestion for which there is no other cause found, is primarily with education as well as smooth muscle relaxant and promotility drugs. There also may be a role for anti-depressant drugs and dietary changes. Because acid reflux is so common, a trial of potent stomach acid suppression often is used as the initial treatment.
Many people are able to identify specific foods that provoke their indigestion. Despite this fact, there are few foods whose avoidance can be universally recommended since not all people with indigestion have trouble with the same foods. There also are no foods or diets that can be recommended for preventing indigestion other than those that eliminated foods that provoke symptoms.
There is no evidence that home remedies or natural remedies prevent indigestion.
Future advances in the treatment of indigestion depend on a clearer understanding of its many cause(s).
