



Emphysema is a chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) that presents as an abnormal and permanent enlargement of air spaces distal to the terminal bronchioles. It frequently occurs in association with obstructive pulmonary problems and chronic bronchitis. It is unusual for someone to have pure emphysema unless it is a result of genetic abnormalities. Most people have some combination of emphysema and chronic bronchitis with varying degrees of airway bronchospasm. This condition is commonly referred to as COPD (and in the United Kingdom, as chronic obstructive lung disease, COLD).
There are three morphological types of emphysema; 1) centriacinar, 2) panacinar, and 3) paraseptal.


Emphysema staging helps determine how much lung damage is present and how severe it is. The Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) uses FEV1 measurements to help with this determination:
Emphysema Center
Understanding COPD Slideshow
COPD (Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease) Quiz
Energy Foods for COPD Slideshow Pictures
COPD (Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease) FAQs
Patient Comments: Emphysema - Experience
Patient Comments: Emphysema - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Emphysema - Treatments
Patient Comments: Emphysema - Diagnosis
Patient Comments: Emphysema - Causes
Patient Comments: Emphysema - Smoking
Find a local Pulmonologist in your town
Emphysema definition and facts
What is emphysema?
What are the stages of emphysema?
What causes emphysema?
What are the risk factors for emphysema?
What are the signs and symptoms of emphysema?
How is emphysema diagnosed?
What is the treatment for emphysema?
Quitting smoking
Emphysema medications
Surgery for emphysema
Pulmonary rehabilitation for emphysema
What is the life expectancy and outlook for someone with emphysema?
Emphysema is a destructive disease of the lung in which the alveoli (small sacs) that promote oxygen exchange between the air and the bloodstream are destroyed.
Smoking is the primary cause of emphysema, which makes it a preventable illness.
There are also less common genetic causes of emphysema including alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency.
The primary symptom of emphysema is shortness of breath. It is a progressive complaint by affected individuals, worsening over time. Early in the disease, shortness of breath may occur with exercise and activity but symptoms gradually worsen and may occur at rest.
Diagnosis of emphysema is based upon history, physical examination, and pulmonary function studies.
Once present, emphysema is not curable, but its symptoms are controllable.
Medication regimens are available to preserve function for daily activities and quality of life for an individual with emphysema.
Oxygen supplementation may be required for a person with emphysema.
Exercise training and education are essential components of emphysema therapy and pulmonary rehabilitation.
Surgical options for individuals with emphysema have been developed and but are not expected to be available for widespread use.
Emphysema does not affect quantity of life, but rather quality of life. There are no studies that can predict life-expectancy in individuals with emphysema.

            
            Readers Comments 39
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
Centriacinar begins in the respiratory bronchioles and spreads peripherally mainly in the upper half of the lungs and is usually associated with long-standing cigarette smoking.
Panacinar predominates in the lower half of the lungs and destroys the alveolar tissue and is associated with homozygous alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency, a genetic disease.
Paraseptal emphysema preferentially localizes around the septae of the lungs or pleura, often associated with inflammatory processes, like prior lung infections.
