

Endometriosis Symptoms, Causes, Treatments, and Prognosis Center
Endometriosis Slideshow Pictures
Take the Endometriosis Quiz!
Pelvic Pain Pictures Slideshow
Endometriosis FAQs
Patient Comments: Endometriosis - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Endometriosis  - Treatments
Patient Comments: Endometriosis - Infertility
Patient Comments: Endometriosis - Diagnosis
Patient Comments: Endometriosis - Experience
Patient Comments: Endometriosis: Diet
Find a local Obstetrician-Gynecologist in your town
Endometriosis definition and facts
What is endometriosis?
What are the stages of endometriosis?
What are the signs and symptoms of endometriosis?
Does endometriosis increase a woman's risk of getting cancer?
What causes endometriosis?
Does endometriosis cause infertility?
Does diet affect endometriosis?
Is there a test to diagnose endometriosis?
What is the treatment for endometriosis?
NSAIDs and GnRH analogs
Progestins
Birth control pills (oral contraceptives)
Aromatase inhibitors and other drugs
Can surgery cure endometriosis?
Which specialties of doctors treat endometriosis?
Who gets endometriosis?
What is the prognosis for a woman with endometriosis?
Can endometriosis be prevented?

            
            Readers Comments 13
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
Endometriosis is the abnormal growth of cells (endometrial cells) similar to those that form the inside of the uterus, but in a location outside of the uterus. Endometriosis is most commonly found on other organs of the pelvis.
The exact cause of endometriosis has not been identified.
Endometriosis is more common in women who are experiencing infertility than in fertile women, but the condition does not necessarily cause infertility.
Most women with endometriosis have no symptoms. However, when women do experience signs and symptoms of endometriosis they may include:Pelvic pain that may worsen during menstruationPainful intercoursePainful bowel movements or urinationInfertility
Pelvic pain that may worsen during menstruation
Painful intercourse
Painful bowel movements or urination
Infertility
Pelvic pain during menstruation or ovulation can be a symptom of endometriosis, but may also occur in normal women.
Endometriosis can be suspected based on the woman's pattern of symptoms, and sometimes during a physical examination, but the definite diagnosis is usually confirmed by surgery, most commonly by laparoscopy.
Treatment of endometriosis includes medication and surgery for both pain relief and treatment of infertility if pregnancy is desired.
