

The Eustachian tube originates in the rear of the nose adjacent to the soft palate, runs a slightly uphill course, and ends in the middle ear space. The Eustachian tube connects the middle ear space to the rear of the nose near the soft palate. The middle ear space is the hollowed out portion of the skull bone that contains the hearing apparatus and is covered on one side by the eardrum.
Cartilage provides the supporting structure for the first two-thirds of the Eustachian tube, with the last third (the part closest to the middle ear space) being made of bone.
In adults, the Eustachian tube is approximately 35 mm long (1.3 inches) and approximately 3 mm in diameter (less than 1/10 inch).
The tissue that lines the Eustachian tube is similar to that inside the nasal cavity and may respond the same way (swelling and mucous production) when presented with similar stimuli. Normally, the Eustachian tube is closed, but it can become partially or completely blocked as a consequence of common colds or allergies.
Partial or complete blockage of the Eustachian tube can cause sensations of popping, clicking, and ear fullness. Altitude changes can cause symptoms in persons with Eustachian tube problems. Several maneuvers can be done to improve Eustachian tube function.
The Eustachian tube was named in honor of the 16th century Italian anatomist Eustachius. Sources credit Alcmaeon of Sparta as the first to describe the structure in approximately 400 BC.
Eustachian Tube Problems Home Remedies, Symptoms, Blocked, Clearing, Surgery, Treatment Center
Anatomy of an Ear Infection Slideshow Pictures
Take the Ear Infection Quiz
Ear Health Quiz
Ear Infection (Otitis Media) FAQs
Patient Comments: Eustachian Tube Problems - Experience
Patient Comments: Eustachian Tube Problems - Treatments
Patient Comments: Eustachian Tube Problems - Altitude and Air Travel
Patient Comments: Eustachian Tube Problems - Symptoms
Find a local Ear, Nose, & Throat Doctor in your town
What should you know about Eustachian tubes?
What is the anatomy of Eustachian tubes (pictures)?
What are the signs and symptoms of blocked Eustachian tubes?
What causes blocked Eustachian tubes?
What home remedies treat pain, function, and help clear blooked Eustachian tubes?
What is the medical treatment for Eustachian tube dysfunction?
Will surgery cure Eustachian tube dysfunction?
What changes can you make to avoid Eustachian tube dysfunction at altitudes?

            
            Readers Comments 70
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
