



Fatigue can be described as the lack of energy and motivation (both physical and mental). This is different than drowsiness, a term that describes the need to sleep. Often a person complains of feeling tired and it is up to the health care professional to distinguish between fatigue and drowsiness, though both can occur at the same time. Aside from drowsiness, other symptoms can be confused with fatigue including shortness of breath with activity and muscle weakness. Again, all these symptoms can occur at the same time. Also, fatigue can be a normal response to physical and mental activity; in most normal individuals it is quickly relieved (usually in hours to about a day, depending on the intensity of the activity) by reducing the activity.
Fatigue is a very common complaint and it is important to remember that it is a symptom and not a disease. Many illnesses can result in the complaint of fatigue and they can be physical, psychological, or a combination of the two.
Often, the symptom of fatigue has a gradual onset and the person may not be aware of how much energy they have lost until they try to compare their ability to complete tasks from one time frame to another. They may presume that their fatigue is due to aging and ignore the symptom. This may lead to a delay in seeking care.
While it is true that depression and other psychiatric issues may be the reason for fatigue, it is reasonable to make certain that there is not an underlying physical illness that is the root cause.
Individuals with fatigue may have three primary complaints; however, it can vary in each person.
While fatigue can last for a prolonged period of time, the presence of chronic fatigue is different than chronic fatigue syndrome, which has specific set of two criteria set for by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention as follows:
Other words that a person might use to describe fatigue may include:
Fatigue Symptoms, Causes, and Treatment Center
Fibromyalgia Overview Slideshow
Take the Fibromyalgia Quiz
Fibromyalgia: 12 Tips for Coping Slideshow
Patient Comments: Fatigue - Experience
Patient Comments: Fatigue - Causes
Patient Comments: Fatigue - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Fatigue - Diagnosis
Patient Comments: Fatigue - Treatment
Find a local Doctor in your town
Fatigue definition and facts
What is fatigue? What does it feel like?
What causes fatigue?
What are the signs and symptoms of fatigue?
Is there a test to diagnose fatigue?
What is the treatment for fatigue?
Can fatigue be prevented?

            
            Readers Comments 11
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
Fatigue (either physical, mental or both) is a symptom that may be difficult for the patient to describe and words like lethargic, exhausted and tired may be used.
Taking a careful and complete history is the key to help making the underlying diagnosis of the cause for the symptom of fatigue. However, in about a third of patients the cause is not found and the diagnosis is not known.
There are numerous causes of fatigue symptoms. Examples of some treatable causes of fatigue include anemia, diabetes,thyroid disease, heart disease, COPD and sleep disorders (Table).
Long lasting complaints of fatigue do not equate to chronic fatigue syndrome. Specific criteria as set by the CDC need to be met to make that particular diagnosis.
There may be lack of motivation or the ability to begin an activity;
the person tires easily once the activity has begun; and
the person has mental fatigue or difficulty with concentration and memory to start or complete an activity.
Have severe chronic fatigue for at least six months or longer with other known medical conditions (whose manifestation includes fatigue) excluded by clinical diagnosis; and
Concurrently have four or more of the following symptoms:
post-exertional malaise
impaired memory or concentration
unrefreshing sleep
muscle pain
multi-joint pain without redness or swelling
tender cervical or axillary lymph nodes
sore throat
headache
lethargic,
listless,
lack of energy,
tired,
worn out,
weary,
exhausted,
malaise, or
feeling run down.
