

Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, NAFLD) is the accumulation of abnormal amounts of fat within the liver. Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease can be divided into isolated fatty liver in which there is only accumulation of fat, and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) in which there is fat, inflammation, and damage to liver cells.
NASH progresses to scarring and ultimately to cirrhosis, with all the complications of cirrhosis, for example, gastrointestinal bleeding, liver failure, and liver cancer. The development of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease is intimately associated with and is probably caused by obesity and diabetes. Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease is considered a manifestation of the metabolic syndrome.
The symptoms of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease are primarily those of the complications of cirrhosis in patients with NASH; isolated fatty liver infrequently causes symptoms and usually is discovered incidentally. The complications of cirrhosis include gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding, mental changes (encephalopathy), accumulation of fluid (ascites, edema) and, liver cancer.
Usually, to differentiate isolated fatty liver from NASH requires a liver biopsy The most promising treatments for nonalcoholic fatty liver disease are diet, exercise, weight loss, and possibly bariatric surgery. Several drugs have been studied in the treatment of NASH. There is little evidence that any drug is effective in slowing the disease progression of NASH.
Many diseases are associated with NASH and are part of the metabolic syndrome. These diseases should be screened for and treated, for example, high blood pressure, dyslipidemia and diabetes. Isolated fatty liver rarely progresses to NASH or cirrhosis. Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, including NASH affects young children as well. NASH will become the number one reason for liver transplantation unless effective and safe treatments are found.
Fatty Liver (Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver)  Symptoms, Causes, and Complications Center
Take the Liver Disease Quiz
Hepatitis Slideshow Pictures
Take the Alcohol Quiz
Patient Comments: Fatty Liver - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Fatty Liver - Causes
Patient Comments: Fatty Liver - Diet
Patient Comments: Fatty Liver - Treatment and Medications
Find a local Gastroenterologist in your town
What should I know about nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NASH)?
What is fatty liver disease? What is nonalcoholic liver disease (NASH)?
What are the signs and symptoms of fatty liver disease?
What causes NASH?
Can obesity and diabetes cause NASH?
Can metabolic syndrome cause NASH?
Can alcohol or drug abuse cause NASH?
Can NASH occur in children?
Is fatty liver disease serious?
What procedures and tests diagnose NASH?
What is the treatment for NASH?
Which foods and supplements should be avoided? Can you drink alcohol?
Weight loss and exercise for NASH
Medications and other treatment options
Bariatric surgery
Liver transplantation
What are the complications of NASH?
What diseases are associated with NASH?
What is the relationship between nonalcoholic fatty liver disease and heart disease?
What is the difference between nonalcoholic fatty liver and steatohepatitis (NASH)?
