



Felty's syndrome is a complication of long-standing rheumatoid arthritis. Felty's syndrome is defined by the presence of three conditions: rheumatoid arthritis, an enlarged spleen (splenomegaly), and an abnormally low white blood cell count. Felty's syndrome is uncommon. It affects less than 1% of patients with rheumatoid arthritis.


The cause of Felty's syndrome is not known. Some patients with rheumatoid arthritis develop Felty's syndrome, but most do not. White blood cells are produced in the bone marrow. There seems to be an active bone marrow function in patients with Felty's syndrome, producing white cells, despite the low numbers of circulating white blood cells (neutropenia). White cells may be stored excessively in the spleen of a patient with Felty's syndrome. This is especially true in patients with Felty's syndrome that have antibodies against the particular type of white blood cells usually affected (cells called granulocytes or neutrophils).
Felty's Syndrome Center
Rheumatoid Arthritis Slideshow Pictures
Joint-Friendly Exercises to Reduce RA Pain Slideshow
Take the RA Quiz
Patient Comments: Felty's Syndrome - Symptoms
Find a local Rheumatologist in your town
Felty's syndrome facts
What is Felty's syndrome?
What causes Felty's syndrome?
What are risk factors for Felty's syndrome?
What are the signs and symptoms of Felty's syndrome?
How do doctors diagnose Felty's syndrome?
What specialists treat Felty's syndrome?
What is the treatment for Felty's syndrome? What are complications of Felty's syndrome?
Are there home remedies for Felty's syndrome?
What is the prognosis of Felty's syndrome?
Is it possible to prevent Felty's syndrome?
Felty's syndrome is a complication of long-standing rheumatoid arthritis.
Patients with Felty's syndrome can have more infections than the average person and can develop leg ulcers.
The cause of Felty's syndrome is not known.
Felty's syndrome is diagnosed by the presence of three conditions: rheumatoid arthritis, an enlarged spleen, and an abnormally low white blood count.
Treatment of Felty's syndrome is not always required, but medications are used for serious manifestations.
