

*Fish odor syndrome (trimethylaminuria) facts Medically Edited by:
 Charles P. Davis, MD, PhD
Fish Odor Syndrome  (Trimethylaminuria) Center
Patient Comments: Fish Odor Syndrome - Signs and Symptoms
Patient Comments: Fish Odor Syndrome - Causes
Patient Comments: Fish Odor Syndrome - Treatment
Find a local Doctor in your town
Fish odor syndrome (trimethylaminuria) facts*
What is fish odor syndrome (trimethylaminuria)?
What are the signs and symptoms of fish odor syndrome 
	(trimethylaminuria)?
What causes fish odor syndrome (trimethylaminuria)?
How common is fish odor syndrome (trimethylaminuria)?
What genes are related to fish odor syndrome (trimethylaminuria)?
How do people inherit fish odor syndrome (trimethylaminuria)?
Where can I find information about diagnosis, management, or treatment of 
	fish odor syndrome (trimethylaminuria)?
Where can I find additional information about fish odor syndrome (trimethylaminuria)?
What other names do people use for fish odor syndrome (trimethylaminuria)?
What if I still have specific questions about fish odor syndrome (trimethylaminuria)?
Fish odor syndrome (trimethylaminuria) is a genetic disease; symptoms are 
often present from birth.
Fish odor syndrome is characterized by an offensive body odor and the smell 
of rotting fish due to the excessive excretion of trimethylaminuria (TMA) in the 
urine, sweat, and breath of affected individuals.
Fish odor syndrome is caused by mutations in the FMO3 gene.
Other causes of odor body can occur as a result from an excess of proteins 
in the diet, or from an increase in bacteria that normally produce 
trimethylamine in the GI tract (also may make fish odor syndrome worse); 
	liver 
disease, kidney disease, poor hygiene, 
	gingivitis, and cases of blood-borne 
halitosis. Diagnostic tests that help differentiate fish odor syndrome 
(trimethylaminuria) from other causes of body odor are available at specialized 
laboratories. 
Fish odor syndrome symptoms have been seen temporarily in a small number of 
premature infants and in healthy women at the start of menstruation, usually in 
individuals that are heterozygous for the mutant FMO3 gene or due to immaturity 
of the faulty FMO3 gene expression (FMO3 expression increases with age).
Fish odor syndrome treatment includes certain dietary restrictions, use of 
acid lotions and soaps to remove secreted trimethylamine on the skin, use of 
activated charcoal and copper chlorophyllin, certain antibiotics, laxatives, and 
riboflavin supplements.
