



Food poisoning is a food borne disease. Ingestion of food that contains a toxin, chemical or infectious agent (like a bacterium, virus, parasite, or prion) may cause adverse symptoms in the body. Those symptoms may be related only to the gastrointestinal tract causing vomiting or diarrhea or they may involve other organs such as the kidney, brain, or muscle.
Typically most foodborne diseases cause vomiting and diarrhea that tend to be short lived and resolve on their own, but dehydration and electrolyte abnormalities may develop. The Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) estimates approximately 48 million people become ill from food-related diseases each year resulting in 128,000 hospitalizations, and 3,000 deaths.
According to the CDC, in 2011, the most common foodborne illnesses in the United States each year are caused by Norovirus, and the bacteria Campylobacter, Clostridium perfringens, and Salmonella.
Food Poisoning Symptoms, Remedies, Treatment, and Cure Center
Food Poisoning Slideshow Pictures
Food Frauds Slideshow Pictures
Take the Summer Food Safety Quiz
Summer Food Safety FAQs
Patient Comments: Food Poisoning - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Food Poisoning - Treatment
Patient Comments: Food Poisoning - Causes
Patient Comments: Food Poisoning - Experience
Patient Comments: Food Poisoning - Home Remedies
Find a local Doctor in your town
Food poisoning definition and facts
What is food poisoning?
What are the signs and symptoms of food poisoning?
Are food poisoning and stomach flu the same thing?
What is the duration of food poisoning?
What are the types of food poisoning?
What are the causes of food poisoning?
Short incubation period of less than 16 to 24 hours
Intermediate incubation from about 1 to 3 days
Long incubation of 3 to 5 days
Very long incubation of up to a month
What tests diagnose food poisoning?
What is the treatment for food poisoning?
What natural and home remedies treat food poisoning?
What are the complications of food poisoning?
When should the doctor be called for food poisoning?
How can food poisoning be prevented?
What is the prognosis for someone with food poisoning?
Food poisoning is a common infectious condition that affects millions of people in the United States each year.
Most commonly, people complain ofvomiting,diarrhea, andcramping abdominal pain.
vomiting,
diarrhea, and
cramping abdominal pain.
People should seek medical care if they have an associated fever, blood in their stool (rectal bleeding), signs and symptoms of dehydration, or if their symptoms do not resolve after a couple of days.
Treatment for food poisoning focuses on keeping the affected person well hydrated.
Most cases of food poisoning resolve on their own.
Prevention is key and depends upon keeping food preparation areas clean, proper hand washing, and cooking foods thoroughly.

            
            Readers Comments 63
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
