

Frostbite is severe damage to tissues from temperatures below 95F and 35C rectally due to the formation of ice crystals within cells, rupturing the cells and leading to cell death. There are three stages of frostbite, frostnip (first degree injury), second, third, and fourth, which is the most severe form of frostbite.
The 3 stages of frostbite are frostnip are (stage 1), stage 2, and stage 4, which is the most severe form of frostbite.
Frostbite symptoms and signs include tingling, numbness, and changes in the color and texture of the skin.
Frostbite, frostnip, chilblains, and trench foot usually are self-diagnosed.
First aid treatment for frostbite at home are call 911, cover yourself with blankets and move to a warm area, change any wet clothing to clothes that are dry. Keep the area that has been frostbitten elevated higher than your heart to get increase the blood flow to the heart, drink warm liquids, and don't rewarm the area because it leads to disasterous results.
Frostbite is a medical emergency, call 911 or go to your nearest Urgent Care or Emergency Department because you can lose body parts. Treatment generally includes moving out of the cold environment, removing wet clothing, and rewarming the affected area.
Frostbite is a serious cold weather-related injury that requires immediate medical attention and rapid rewarming. Do not thaw the affected area if there is the risk of refreezing. Certain people, such as the elderly, children, alcoholics, and the homeless, are at increased risk of developing cold weather-related injuries like frostbite or frostnip.
The usual recovery period for uncomplicated trench foot can be several weeks.
Prevention of cold weather-related injuries is best accomplished through proper planning and preparation for cold weather.


Frostbite, Frostnip Pictures, Symptoms, Signs, Stages, First Aid, Recovery, and Prevention Center
First Aid Essentials Slideshow
Take the Trauma and First Aid Quiz
First Aid Sprains & Strains Slideshow Pictures
Patient Comments: Frostbite - Experience
Patient Comments: Frostbite - Symptoms and Signs
Patient Comments: Frostbite - Recovery Time
What should I know about frostbite?
What are the 3 stages of frostbite (pictures)?
What are the early signs and symptoms of frostbite?
What is the difference between frostnip and frostbite?
What type of injuries can be caused by cold weather?
What are the superficial and severe frostbite stages?
What are the signs and symptoms of frostnip?
What are the signs and symptoms of chilblains?
What are the signs and symptoms of trench foot?
When should you call a doctor if you have frostnip or frostbite?
How is frostbite diagnosed?
What is the first aid treatment for frostbite?
How long does it take to recover from frostbite or frostnip?
9 Tips to prevent frostbite.

            
            Readers Comments 6
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
