
            
            Readers Comments 1
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
Gallstones are "stones" that form in the gallbladder or bile ducts. The common types of gallstones are cholesterol, black pigment, and brown pigment.
The most common symptoms of gallstones are biliary colic and cholecystitis; however, usually gallstones cause no symptoms.
The pain from biliary colic is a very specific type that comes on suddenly or rapidly and builds to a peak over a few minutes; however, the pain may vary in severity. Movement does not make the pain worse.
Other signs and symptoms of biliary colic include:NauseaPain commonly felt in the upper abdomenRarely, pain may be felt under the sternum, and is mistaken for a heart attack or angina (chest pain).Biliary colic usually has a pattern that varies from person to person.
Nausea
Pain commonly felt in the upper abdomen
Rarely, pain may be felt under the sternum, and is mistaken for a heart attack or angina (chest pain).
Biliary colic usually has a pattern that varies from person to person.
Gallstones do not cause intolerance to fatty foods, belching, abdominal distention, or gas.
Complications of gallstones include cholangitis, gangrene of the gallbladder, jaundice, pancreatitis, sepsis, fistula, and ileus.
Gallbladder sludge is associated with symptoms and complications of gallstones; however, like gallstones, sludge usually does not cause problems.
The best single test for diagnosing gallstones is transabdominal ultrasonography. Other tests include endoscopic ultrasonography, magnetic resonance cholangio-pancreatography (MRCP), cholescintigraphy (HIDA scan), endoscopic retrograde cholangio-pancreatography (ERCP), liver and pancreatic blood tests, duodenal drainage, oral cholecystogram (OCG), and intravenous cholangiogram (IVC).
Gallstones are managed primarily with observation (no treatment) or removal of the gallbladder (cholecystectomy). Less commonly used treatments include sphincterotomy and extraction of gallstones, dissolution with oral medications, and extra-corporeal shock-wave lithotripsy (ESWL). Prevention of cholesterol gallstones also is possible with oral medications.
Symptoms of gallstones should stop following cholecystectomy. If they do not, it is likely that gallstones were left in the ducts, there is a second problem within the bile ducts, or the symptoms are caused by another problem.
Many dietary recommendations have been made for the prevention or treatment of gallstones and to prevent their symptoms, but none of them have been shown to be effective.
Many home remedies have been suggested for eliminating gallstones, but none have been shown to be effective
Continuing research is directed at uncovering the genes that are responsible for the formation of gallstones.
