



Gastroenteritis is a nonspecific term for various inflammatory problems in the gastrointestinal tract with the most common symptoms and signs being diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, and abdominal pains. Gastroenteritis is often referred to as the "stomach flu," however, it is not related to the influenza virus.
In the U.S., less than 2% of the estimated 100 million people with stomach flu symptoms per year ever require hospitalization, but in developing countries it is a leading cause of death, mainly due to dehydration.


Although the stomach flu and food poisoning share some common symptoms such as diarrhea, nausea and vomiting, stomach cramps, muscle aches, for example, they are not exactly the same condition.
Consequently, there is some crossover between the two terms.
In addition:


Although both the stomach flu and the flu (influenza) may be caused by viruses, the viral genus and species are different for each entity.
Stomach Flu (Gastroenteritis) Symptoms, Signs Treatment Remedies, Diet Center
Take the Pancreatitis Quiz
Boost Digestive Health
Digestive Distress Slideshow: Problem Foods to Avoid
Summer Food Safety FAQs
Patient Comments: Gastroenteritis - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Gastroenteritis - Experience
Patient Comments: Gastroenteritis - Cause
Patient Comments: Gastroenteritis - Treatment
Patient Comments: Gastroenteritis - Complications
Patient Comments: Gastroenteritis - Diagnosis
Find a local Gastroenterologist in your town
Stomach flu (gastroenteritis) definition and facts
What is the stomach flu (gastroenteritis)?
Are the stomach flu (gastroenteritis) and food poisoning the same condition?
Are the stomach flu (gastroenteritis) and the flu (influenza) the same infection?
What are the signs and symptoms of stomach flu (gastroenteritis)?
What are the signs and symptoms of stomach flu (gastroenteritis) in children?
How is the stomach flu (gastroenteritis) spread?
Who gets the stomach flu (gastroenteritis)?
How long does the stomach flu (gastroenteritis) last?
Is stomach flu (gastroenteritis) contagious?
What causes stomach flu (gastroenteritis)?
What are the most common causes of the stomach flu (gastroenteritis)?
How do I know I have the stomach flu (gastroenteritis)?
What natural and home remedies help soothe stomach flu (gastroenteritis) 
symptoms?
What should foods are recommended to eat (diet ) when you have the stomach flu (gastroenteritis)?
What is the treatment for the stomach flu (gastroenteritis)?
Which specialties of doctors treat the stomach flu (gastroenteritis)?
When should I call my doctor for stomach flu (gastroenteritis)?
What are complications of stomach flu (gastroenteritis)?
Can you prevent from getting the stomach flu (gastroenteritis)?
What is the prognosis for a person who gets the stomach flu (gastroenteritis)?

            
            Readers Comments 13
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
The stomach flu (gastroenteritis) is a nonspecific term for various inflammatory problems in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract.
Gastroenteritis may be of short duration (acute viral) or for many months (chronic gastroenteritis, such as that caused by food allergies).
Signs and symptoms of stomach flu depend on the cause.
The most frequent signs and symptoms of viral stomach flu includediarrhea,nausea, andvomiting.
diarrhea,
nausea, and
vomiting.
Signs and symptoms of bacterial stomach flu includefever, andbloodied diarrhea (hemorrhagic gastroenteritis).
fever, and
bloodied diarrhea (hemorrhagic gastroenteritis).
Food allergies may produce eosinophilic gastroenteritis, a sign of which is increased eosinophils (a type of white blood cell) seen in the blood.
Children with the stomach flu or gastroenteritis have similar symptoms to adults, but also may have symptoms such as refusing to drink or being very thirsty.
The main way contagious causes of the stomach flu are spread is person to person via the fecal-oral route. Individuals at most risk of catching the stomach flu are those in close association with an infant, child, or an adult that has a viral or bacterial cause of stomach flu .
Contagious gastroenteritis is spread or transmitted usually by the fecal – oral route or by eating or drinking contaminated foods.
Non-contagious causes of gastroenteritis include food allergies, parasites, drugs, toxins, or the side effects of medications.
The most common causes of gastroenteritis are infectious, mainly viral (for example, Norovirus, Rotavirus and many others). The large majority of causes gastroenteritis disease (mainly viral and bacterial) are contagious.
Bacterial causes of gastroenteritis include Staphylococcus, Salmonella, Shigella, E. coli, and others.
Stomach flu is diagnosed in most cases without specific tests, however, tests can help define the underlying cause.
Home remedies may reduce symptoms of stomach flu, including diet changes.
Most people with viral or mild bacterial gastroenteritis require no treatment. Some individuals may require symptom reduction with medications but more serious bacterial infections may require antibiotic therapy.
Some doctors recommend the "BRAT" (bananas, rice, applesauce, toast) diet to people recovering from stomach flu.
Notify medical personnel if you have the stomach flu for more than five days, or if dehydration, bloodied diarrhea, constant abdominal pain, or high fever develops.
The major complication of gastroenteritis is dehydration.
Stomach flu often can be prevented by hand washing, not eating undercooked food or drinking contaminated water, and avoiding direct contact with individuals with the disease. Some specific types of gastroenteritis can be reduced or prevented by vaccine (for example, vaccine against cholera-causing bacteria).
Stomach flu or gastroenteritis means any nonspecific inflammatory problem in the gastrointestinal tract; some doctors consider the stomach flu to be more narrowly defined as a viral infection that attacks the digestive system.
Food poisoning specifically is caused by eating or drinking contaminated food or fluid that contains bacteria, viruses, parasites and/or their toxins they produce.
Food poisoning usually is found in small outbreaks that occur among individuals that have ingested the same foods or drink, and symptoms occur rapidly within hours; whereas the stomach flu has a more gradual onset of symptoms and usually lasts longer than food poisoning.
Stomach flu is highly contagious and can be spread quickly to other individuals; whereas food poisoning usually requires ingesting the poison and does not easily spread to other individuals.
The viruses that cause the majority of stomach flu (gastroenteritis) are Norovirus spp; whereas the viruses that cause influenza are mainly Influenza A and B viral spp and subtypes.
Stomach flu results mainly in problems with the gastrointestinal tract while influenza (flu) involves the respiratory tract. These two problems are not the same thing.
