

Genital Warts (HPV) in Women Symptoms, Transmission, and Treatment Center
Sexually Transmitted Diseases (STDs) Slideshow Pictures
Take the Quiz on STDs
Patient Comments: Genital Warts (HPV) - Effective Treatments
Patient Comments: Genital Warts - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Genital Warts in Women - Treatment
Patient Comments: Genital Warts in Women - Experience
Find a local Obstetrician-Gynecologist in your town
Genital warts (HPV) infection in women definition and facts
What are genital warts (HPV infection)? Who gets them?
What are the signs and symptoms of genital warts in women?
Are genital warts painful?
What is the incubation period for genital warts?
How do you get genital warts (HPV infection)? How do the warts spread?
Is there a vaccine for girls, boys, women, and men to prevent genital warts and HPV infection?
Is there a treatment or cure for genital warts? Can they be removed or cured?
What happens if genital warts aren't treated?
What if a woman has precancerous changes (dysplasia) of the cervix? Can genital warts cause cancer?
Will birth control protect against genital warts or HPV infection?
What to you do if you have been exposed to genital warts (HPV infection)?
Is there a test to diagnose genital warts?
Is there a DNA test for types of HPV infection?
What do genital warts look like (pictures) in women and men?

            
            Readers Comments 5
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
Genital warts are caused by infection with a subgroup of the human papillomaviruses (HPVs). Another subgroup of the HPVs that infect the anogenital tract can lead to precancerous changes in the uterine cervix and cause cervical cancer. Other types of HPV have been linked to oropharangeal cancer.
HPV infection is the most common sexually transmitted disease STD in the US, and usually does not lead to the development of warts, cancers, or sometimes, no symptoms.
When signs and symptoms of genital warts in women do occur, many include itching, burning, or tenderness in and around the vagina.
Other signs and symptoms of genital warts in women include:Warts may have a corrugated or cauliflower-like) appearance.Genital warts can appear any part of the body that is exposed to sexual contact, for example, in women, the vulva, vagina, cervix, or groin, (in men, the penis, scrotum, thigh, or groin).Irritation at the location of the warts
Warts may have a corrugated or cauliflower-like) appearance.
Genital warts can appear any part of the body that is exposed to sexual contact, for example, in women, the vulva, vagina, cervix, or groin, (in men, the penis, scrotum, thigh, or groin).
Irritation at the location of the warts
HPV infection (genital warts) of the genital tract is contagious, and transmitted through skin-to-skin or sexual contact; however, it is possible to become infected with genital warts without sexual transmission.
No natural, home remedies, or other treatments can cure genital warts or HVP infection.
Removal treatments for genital warts are treated available, but the warts may return in the future.
Wearing condoms seems to decrease the risk of transmission of HPV during sexual activity, it but does not completely prevent HPV infection (genital warts).
Researchers estimate that at least 75% of the men and women of reproductive age has been infected with a sexually transmitted HPV like genital warts.
There is no cure for HPV infection, although there are treatment options available for removal of genital warts.
