



Gestational diabetes is diabetes, or high blood sugar levels, that develops during pregnancy. It occurs in about 4% of all pregnancies. Gestational diabetes usually is diagnosed in the later stages of pregnancy, and often occurs in women who have no prior history of diabetes.


Gestational diabetes is thought to arise because the many changes, hormonal and otherwise, that occur in the body during pregnancy predispose some women to become resistant to insulin. Insulin is a hormone made by specialized cells in the pancreas that allows the body to effectively metabolize glucose for later usage as fuel (energy). When levels of insulin are low, or the body cannot effectively use insulin (i.e., insulin resistance), blood glucose levels rise.
Gestational Diabetes Center
Type 2 Diabetes: Learn the Warning Signs
Diabetes Friendly Dining
Type 2 Diabetes: Test Your Medical IQ
Patient Comments: Gestational Diabetes - Experience
Patient Comments: Gestational Diabetes - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Gestational Diabetes - Treatment
Find a local Obstetrician-Gynecologist in your town
Gestational diabetes definition and facts
What is gestational diabetes?
What causes gestational diabetes?
How does gestational diabetes affect the baby?
What are the complications of gestational diabetes for the mother?
Can gestational diabetes be cured?
What are the screening guidelines for gestational diabetes?
What are risk factors for gestational diabetes?
What are the signs and symptoms of gestational diabetes?
Is there a test to diagnose gestational diabetes?
What is the treatment for gestational diabetes?
Is there a special diet for a woman with gestational diabetes?
Can gestational diabetes be prevented?

            
            Readers Comments 1
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
Gestational diabetes is diabetes that occurs in pregnant women.
Risk factors for gestational diabetes includeobesity,a history of gestational diabetes in a previous pregnancy,a family history of type 2 diabetes, andhaving prediabetes.
obesity,
a history of gestational diabetes in a previous pregnancy,
a family history of type 2 diabetes, and
having prediabetes.
There are typically no noticeable signs or symptoms associated with gestational diabetes.
Gestational diabetes can cause the fetus to be larger than normal. Delivery of the baby may be more complicated as a result. The baby is also at risk for developing low blood glucose (hypoglycemia) immediately after birth.
Following a nutrition plan is the typical treatment for gestational diabetes.
Maintaining a healthy weight and following a healthy eating plan may be able to help prevent or minimize the risks of gestational diabetes.
Women with gestational diabetes have an increased risk of developing type 2 diabetes after the pregnancy
