

Graves' disease facts written by Charles Patrick Davis, MD, PhD
Graves' Disease Symptoms, Causes, Diet, and Treatment Options Center
Hyperthyroidism Slideshow Pictures
Take the Thyroid Disorder Quiz
Thyroid Symptoms and Solutions Slideshow Pictures
Patient Comments: Graves' Disease - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Graves' Disease - Causes
Patient Comments: Graves' Disease - Treatment
Find a local Endocrinologist in your town
Graves' disease facts
What is Graves' disease?
What are the signs and symptoms of Graves' disease?
What causes Graves' disease?
Is Graves' disease a problem during pregnancy?
Who gets Graves' disease? Is it common?
What tests diagnose Graves' disease?
Foods (diet) to avoid if you have Graves' disease
What is the treatment for Graves' disease? Can this form of autoimmune thyroid disease be cured?
Radioiodine therapy for Graves' disease
Beta blockers
Antithyroid medications
Surgery for Graves' disease
What serious health problems are caused by untreated Graves' disease? Is it fatal?
Graves' disease is an autoimmune disease of the thyroid that results from abnormal stimulation of the thyroid gland by a material in the blood referred to as thyroid stimulating immunoglobins (TSIs) that bind to and activate thyrotropin receptors.
Graves' disease is the most common cause of hyperthyroidism in the U.S.
Signs and symptoms of Graves' disease includediffuse thyrotoxic goiter,problems getting pregnant,lighter menstrual flow and less frequent periods,weight loss,frequent bowel movements,increased heart rate and heart palpitations,thinning hair,brittle hair,hand tremors,problems sleeping,heat insensitivity,increased sweating,eye problems (ophthalmopathy, exophthalmos), andreddening and thickening of the skin on the shins and top of the feet (pretibial myxedema or thyroid dermopathy).
diffuse thyrotoxic goiter,
problems getting pregnant,
lighter menstrual flow and less frequent periods,
weight loss,
frequent bowel movements,
increased heart rate and heart palpitations,
thinning hair,
brittle hair,
hand tremors,
problems sleeping,
heat insensitivity,
increased sweating,
eye problems (ophthalmopathy, exophthalmos), and
reddening and thickening of the skin on the shins and top of the feet (pretibial myxedema or thyroid dermopathy).
The cause of Graves' disease is thought to be related to many factors including genes, gender, stress, pregnancy, and possibly infections.
Graves' disease affects both men and women; however, the autoimmune thyroid disease affects women about eight to 10 times more often than men.
Risk factors for Graves' disease are associated with other autoimmune diseases such as vitiligo, rheumatoid arthritis, Addison's disease, type 1 diabetes, pernicious anemia, and lupus.
Tests to diagnose Graves' disease include thyroid function tests, radioactive iodine uptake tests, and tests to detect TSIs.
Treatments for Graves' disease include radioactive iodine, antithyroid drugs such as methimazole (Tapazole) and propylthiouracil (PTU), and beta blockers; in some patients, surgery is done.
Untreated Graves' disease can lead to thyrotoxicosis and its severe form, thyroid storm, a life-threatening condition that causes heart problems, weak and brittle bones, and death.
Poorly treated Graves' disease during pregnancy can cause problems for the woman such as preterm birth, miscarriage, heart failure, preeclampsia, and placental abruption.
Poorly treated Graves' disease can cause health problems for a fetus or baby such as preterm birth, low birth weight, thyroid problems, and still birth.
