

*Guinea worm disease facts by John P. Cunha, DO, FACOEP


Dracunculiasis, also known as Guinea worm disease (GWD), is an infection caused by the parasite Dracunculus medinensis. A parasite is an organism that feeds off of another to survive. GWD is spread by drinking water containing Guinea worm larvae. Larvae are immature forms of the worm. GWD affects poor communities in remote parts of Africa that do not have safe water to drink. GWD is considered by global health officials to be a neglected tropical disease (NTD) -- the first parasitic disease slated to be eradicated.
Many federal, private, and international agencies are helping the countries that still have local GWD cases to eradicate this disease. During 2014, only four countries had local GWD cases: Chad, Ethiopia, Mali, and South Sudan. Cases have gone from 3.5 million per year in 1986 to 126 in 2014.
Guinea Worm Disease (Dracunculiasis) Center
Bacterial Infections 101 Pictures Slideshow
Take the Tummy Trouble Quiz
Hepatitis C Slideshow Pictures
Patient Comments: Guinea Worm Disease - Signs and Symptoms
Find a local Infectious Disease Specialist in your town
Guinea worm disease facts*
What is dracunculiasis (Guinea worm disease)?
How does Guinea worm disease spread?
What are the signs and symptoms of Guinea worm disease?
What is the treatment for Guinea worm disease?
Where is Guinea worm disease found?
Who is at risk for infection with Guinea worm disease?
Is Guinea worm disease a serious illness?
Is a person immune to Guinea worm disease once he or she has it?
Is it possible to prevent Guinea worm disease?
Dracunculiasis, more commonly known as Guinea worm disease (GWD), is a preventable infection caused by the parasite Dracunculus medinensis.
In 2011, only four countries reported cases of GWD: Chad, Ethiopia, Mali, and South Sudan.
Anyone who drinks standing pond water contaminated by persons with GWD is at risk for infection.
About 1 year after a person drinks contaminated water, the adult female Guinea worm emerges from a painful blister on the skin of the infected person.
A few days to hours before the worm emerges, the person may develop symptoms of fever, swelling, and pain in the area. More than 90% of the worms appear on the legs and feet.
There is no drug to treat Guinea worm disease (GWD) and no vaccine to prevent infection. Once the worm emerges from the wound, it can only be pulled out a few centimeters each day and wrapped around a piece of gauze or small stick. This process usually takes weeks or months. The worm can also be surgically removed by a doctor before an ulcer forms.
To prevent GWD, education on how to make drinking water safe is key.
