



Illustration of Enlarged Male Breasts (Gynecomastia)
Gynecomastia (Breast Enlargement in Males) Symptoms, Causes, and Treatments Center
Impotence Slideshow Pictures
Sex-Drive Killers Slideshow: Causes of Low Libido
Take the Low Testosterone Quiz
Patient Comments: Gynecomastia - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Gynecomastia - Experience
Patient Comments: Gynecomastia - Treatment
Patient Comments: Gynecomastia - Experience
Find a local Endocrinologist in your town
Gynecomastia definition and facts
What does gynecomastia look like (picture)?
What is gynecomastia (enlarged male breasts)?
Who gets gynecomastia?
What are the signs and symptoms of gynecomastia?
What causes gynecomastia during puberty? How long does it last?
What diseases and conditions cause gynecomastia?
What medications cause gynecomastia?
How do I know if I have gynecomastia (diagnosis)?
How long does it take for gynecomastia to go away?
What drugs are used for the treatment of gynecomastia?
What about surgery for the treatment of gynecomastia? Can it be cured?
Are gynecomastia and male breast cancer related?
Can gynecomastia be prevented?

            
            Readers Comments 1
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
Gynecomastia is enlargement of the glandular tissue of the male breast.
The condition may occur during infancy and puberty in normally developing boys.
Gynecomastia results from an imbalance in the hormonal environment in the body, with a relative excess of estrogens (female hormones) when compared to androgens (male hormones).
The causes of the gynecomastia can result as a side effect of numerous medications and drugs of abuse, for example:Corticosteroids and anabolic steroidsAntibioticsHerbals like dong quai, tea tree oil, and lavenderOpioids (narcotic drugs)Estrogen (including those in soy products)Heartburn drugsAnti-anxiety medication
Corticosteroids and anabolic steroids
Antibiotics
Herbals like dong quai, tea tree oil, and lavender
Opioids (narcotic drugs)
Estrogen (including those in soy products)
Heartburn drugs
Anti-anxiety medication
The problem also is associated with certain medical conditions and treatments, for example:HyperthyroidismChronic kidney failureCirrhosis of the liverLow testosterone levelsObesity
Hyperthyroidism
Chronic kidney failure
Cirrhosis of the liver
Low testosterone levels
Obesity
Medications and surgical treatments can be used to treat the problem.
