



Hashimoto's thyroiditis is an autoimmune condition that is a common cause of hypothyroidism. In Hashimoto's thyroiditis, the body mounts an immune reaction against its own thyroid gland tissue, leading to inflammation of the gland (thyroiditis).
The thyroid is a butterfly-shaped gland located in the lower part of the neck, below the Adam's apple. The thyroid gland wraps around the windpipe and has a shape that is similar to a butterfly - formed by two wings or lobes (lobes), and is attached by a middle part.


Hashimoto's Thyroiditis Symptoms, Diet, and Treatments Center
Hyperthyroidism Slideshow Pictures
Take the Thyroid Disorder Quiz
Thyroid Symptoms and Solutions Slideshow Pictures
Patient Comments: Hashimoto's Thyroiditis - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Hashimoto's Thyroiditis - Diagnosis
Patient Comments: Hashimoto's Thyroiditis - Treatment
Patient Comments: Hashimoto's Thyroiditis - Pregnancy
Find a local Endocrinologist in your town
Hashimoto's thyroiditis definition and facts
What is Hashimoto's thyroiditis? Where is ithe thyroid gland located, and what does it look like?
What are the signs and symptoms of Hashimoto's thyroiditis?
What causes Hashimoto's thyroiditis?
What about Hashimoto's thyroiditis and pregnancy or trying to conceive?
Is there a special diet for someone with Hashimoto's thyroiditis?
What tests diagnose Hashimoto's thyroiditis?
What are the treatment options for Hashimoto's thyroiditis? Is there a cure?
Are there natural treatment treatments for Hashimoto's thyroiditis?
What is the prognosis for someone with Hashimoto's thyroiditis? Can it be prevented?
Hashimoto's thyroiditis (chronic lymphocytic thyroiditis) is an autoimmune disorder that causes inflammation of the thyroid gland. Hashimoto's thyroiditis is the most common cause of hypothyroidism (low thyroid hormone levels in the blood) in the United States.
Symptoms of Hashimoto's thyroiditis are the same as hypothyroidism, and includefeeling cold,depression,dry skin,constipation,fatigue,sleepiness, andweight gain.
feeling cold,
depression,
dry skin,
constipation,
fatigue,
sleepiness, and
weight gain.
Hashimoto's thyroiditis is diagnosed by blood tests that measure thyroid gland function and blood tests that look for antibodies against proteins found in the thyroid gland.
Treatment options for Hashimoto's thyroiditis are oral thyroid hormones to maintain normal thyroid hormone levels.
Since Hashimoto's thyroiditis is an autoimmune disorder it cannot be prevented.
The prognosis for someone with Hashimoto's thyroiditis is excellent with proper treatment.
The condition was named after Dr. Hakaru Hashimoto, the doctor who described it in 1912.
