



A heart attack happens when the flow of blood that brings oxygen to the heart 
muscle is significantly reduced or cut off completely. This is often a result of 
atherosclerosis, a process whereby the arteries narrow due to a buildup of 
plaque (fat, cholesterol, and other substances). Sometimes these plaques can 
break off, and blood clots can form around them. The clots in the coronary 
arteries then block blood flow to the heart, starving it of oxygen and nutrients 
(ischemia), causing damage or death to heart muscle. This damage to the heart 
muscle is a heart attack. Heart attack is medically termed myocardial 
infarction (MI).
Heart Attack Prevention(How to Prevent a Heart Attack) Center
A Visual Guide to Heart Disease
Medical Illustrations of the Heart Image Collection
Take the Heart Disease Quiz!
Find a local Cardiologist in your town
Heart attack prevention definition and facts
What is a heart attack?
What are the signs and symptoms of a heart attack in men and women?
Are signs and symptoms of a heart attack different in women?
What are the signs and symptoms of heart disease (cardiovascular disease)?
What can I do to prevent heart disease or a heart attack?
What kinds of diets are recommended to prevent heart disease and heart attacks?
What tips and lifestyle changes can be made to prevent heart disease and heart attacks?
Will exercise reduce my risk of having heart disease and a heart attack?
What diseases or conditions put a person at a higher risk for heart disease or a heart attack?

	Heart disease is the leading cause of death in the U.S. 
	
About 735,000 
Americans suffer from a
	heart attack each year – that's about one heart attack 
every 43 seconds! 
525,000 of those heart attacks are the first for the person affected, 
	while 210,000 of them happen in people who have previously had a heart 
	attack. 
Symptoms of a heart attack in men and women include
		chest discomfort and discomfort in one or both arms, neck jaw, back, 
		or stomach,
		shortness of breath,
		sweating, and
		palpitations.
	
	
chest discomfort and discomfort in one or both arms, neck jaw, back, 
		or stomach,
shortness of breath,
sweating, and
palpitations.
Women experience the same symptoms of a heart attack as listed above; 
	however in addition women may have
		pain in the upper abdomen,
		extreme fatigue,
		dizziness,
		lightheadedness or fainting.
	
	
pain in the upper abdomen,
extreme fatigue,
dizziness,
lightheadedness or fainting.
Leading a heart-healthy lifestyle such as eating a heart healthy diet, 
	exercise, 
	stress reduction, and disease prevention or management is the best way to prevent heart 
disease and heart attack.
