



Cardiovascular disease includes a large number of unique conditions that can affect not only the heart but also the blood vessels throughout the body including those in the brain (stroke) and extremities (peripheral artery disease). Within the heart, disease can affect the physical structure including the valves (for example, congenital mitral valve prolapse or rheumatic heart disease caused by strep infections) or the muscle wall (for example, cardiomyopathy or congestive heart failure). Cardiovascular disease also includes conditions of vascular function (for example, endothelial dysfunction, angina, or hypertension), inflammation (for example, endo- or myocarditis), or the electrical regulation of the heartbeat (for example, arrhythmia or atrial fibrillation).
Heart Disease in Women Center
A Visual Guide to Heart Disease
Medical Illustrations of the Heart Image Collection
Take the Heart Disease Quiz!
Patient Comments: Heart Disease in Women - Symptoms
Find a local Gastroenterologist in your town
Heart disease in women facts
What is cardiovascular disease (CVD)?
What is atherosclerosis?
What are the statistics for heart disease in women?
What are the gender differences?
What are heart disease risk factors for women?
Lifestyle
Clinical measures and biomarkers of risk
How is heart disease risk calculated?
What causes heart disease in women?
What are the signs and symptoms of heart disease in women?
What are the signs and symptoms of a heart attack in women?
What are the signs and symptoms of stroke?
How is heart disease in women diagnosed?
Imaging studies
Invasive testing
Laboratory testing

            
            Share Your Story
        
Heart disease is the leading cause of death among women.
Most women have at least one risk factor for heart disease.
Heart attack symptoms can be different for women than for men.
Younger women with heart disease are more likely to die than men of the same age with heart disease. It is especially important for women and their doctors to be aware of early risk detection for primary prevention.
Despite being the #1 killer of women, only 13% of women surveyed by the American Heart Association (AHA) thought heart disease was their biggest health risk. Awareness may be a barrier to timely assessment and treatment.
Cardiovascular disease (CVD) can be prevented and reversed with lifestyle changes.
