

Heart Murmur in Newborns, Children, and Adults, Symptoms, Causes, Treatment, Cure, and Life Expectancy Center
A Visual Guide to Heart Disease
Medical Illustrations of the Heart Image Collection
Take the Heart Disease Quiz!
Patient Comments: Heart Murmur - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Heart Murmur - Experience
Patient Comments: Heart Murmur - Diagnosis
Patient Comments: Heart Murmur - Treatment
Patient Comments: Heart Murmur - Causes
Find a local Cardiologist in your town
Heart murmur definition and facts
What is a heart murmur?
What are the signs and symptoms of heart murmurs in infants, children, and adults?
What causes heart murmurs in infants, children, and adults?
What are the risk factors for heart murmur in infants, children, and adults?
What exams, tests, and imaging studies diagnose heart murmurs in infants, children, and adults?
What is the treatment for heart murmurs in infants, children, and adults?
What are the complications of a heart murmur in infants, children, and adults?
What is the prognosis and life expectancy for infants, children, and adults with a heart murmur?
When should in infants, child, and adults seek medical care for a heart murmur?
Can heart murmurs be prevented in infants, children, and adults?
Heart murmurs are abnormal sounds within the heart due to turbulent blood flow.
Signs and symptoms of a heart murmur include:
Chest pain.
A bluish tinge on the skin, lips, or fingernails.
Black outs.
Paliptations or a rapid hear rate.
Edema (swelling) of the legs or feet.
Dizzy or lightheaded.
Difficulty doing daily activities.
Most types of heart murmurs are functional, or physiological, and are normal variants. They are often known as "innocent murmurs."
Some heart murmurs are caused because of an abnormal function of the heart valves. The heart valves may have narrowing (stenosis) or they may leak (regurgitation).
Holes in the septum or wall that divides the atrium or ventricles (septal defects) may cause a murmur.
A heart murmur is a physical finding and not a structural problem within the heart itself. Treatment is aimed at the underlying condition.
