



Heat cramps are the intermittent, involuntary spasm of muscles that occur in an individual who is physically active (for example, working or exercising) in hot or humid weather. They are often associated with dehydration. Heat cramps usually affect the major muscles that are being stressed in the hot environment. Usually these are the thigh and leg (quadriceps, hamstrings, and gastrocnemius), the core muscles (abdominal wall and back) and the arm muscles (biceps, triceps).
Heat cramps can also occur after the activity has been completed. For example, construction workers or roofers can develop cramps a few hours after their work shift is over.
Heat Cramps Center
7 Most Effective Exercises Pictures
10 Benefits of Walking
How to Build a Better Butt Slideshow
Patient Comments: Heat Cramps - Causes
Patient Comments: Heat Cramps - Symptoms
Find a local Doctor in your town
Heat cramps definition and facts
What are heat cramps?
Who is at risk for heat cramps?
What causes heat cramps?
What are the signs and symptoms of heat cramps?
When should an individual seek medical care for heat cramps?
How are heat cramps diagnosed?
What first aid treatments can help heat cramps?
What are the complications of heat cramps?
How can heat cramps be prevented?
What is the prognosis for heat cramps?
Heat cramps are intermittent, involuntary spasms of larger muscles that occur in an individual who is physically active in hot weather.
Heat cramps, heat exhaustion, and heat stroke are collectively known as heat-related illness. Heat cramps are the least serious of the three, but still may be very painful and alarming.
Heat cramps usually affect the major muscles that are being stressed in a hot environment.
Individuals at risk for heat cramps include those who work, exercise, or are active in a hot environment.
Individuals with impaired temperature control mechanisms, such as infants, young children, and the elderly, are also at a greater risk of heat cramps.
Heat cramps are the earliest symptoms of a heat-related illness.
Symptoms of heat cramps include profuse sweating with involuntary spasms of the large muscles in the body.
Heat cramps also may be a symptom of heat exhaustion.
The diagnosis of heat cramps is usually made by reviewing the patient history and identifying the muscle groups that are involuntarily in spasm.
Treatment of heat cramps include rest, cooling the body, hydration, and stretching the muscles that are cramping.
Heat cramps can be prevented by avoiding exercise or work during the heat of the day, drinking plenty of fluids, and resting in cool or shaded areas when possible.
