

Cold Sores (Nongenital Herpes Simplex Infections) Center
Cold Sores Slideshow
Adult Skin Problems Slideshow
Take the Skin Conditions Quiz
Patient Comments: Herpes Simplex Infections (Cold Sores) - Describe Your Experience
Patient Comments: Herpes Simplex Infections (Cold Sores) - Treatments
Patient Comments: Herpes Simplex Infections (Cold Sores) - Symptoms and Signs
Patient Comments: Herpes Simplex Infections (Cold Sores) - Diagnosis
Herpes simplex infections (nongenital cold sores) facts
What are herpes simplex infections?
What causes cold sores?
What are the risk factors for herpes simplex infections?
What makes herpes (cold sores) recur?
Are cold sores contagious?
How do cold sores spread?
What is the incubation period for cold sores?
What is primary oral herpes?
What does recurrent herpes look like?
What are the signs and symptoms of cold sores?
What other conditions can look like oral herpes (cold sores)?
What is angular stomatitis?
What are canker sores?
What types of doctors treat cold sores?
What tests do health care professionals use to diagnose oral herpes?
How long do cold sores last?
What home remedies and over-the-drugs are used for the treatment of cold sores?
What prescription drugs treat cold sores?
What is the treatment for cold sores in children?
What are the possible complications of oral 
herpes (cold sores)?
What is the prognosis for oral herpes (cold sores)? Can they be cured?
Is it possible to prevent cold sores?
Herpes simplex virus (HSV) can cause infections that affect the mouth, face, genitals, skin, buttocks, and the anal area. It is one of the most common chronic viral infections in humans. The prevalence of HSV-1 (oral herpes) infection is 67% of adults worldwide and is higher than the prevalence of HSV-2 (genital herpes).
Of the two herpes simplex viruses (HSV-1 and HSV-2), cold sores are most commonly caused by HSV-1.
The virus resides deep in the nerve roots and may reactivate at a later time, causing the same symptoms and signs in the same location.
Cold sores usually go away within one to two weeks, but they can be treated with antiviral medications, like acyclovir or topical medications such as docosanol (Abreva), to reduce pain and shorten healing time.
