

There are several members of the herpes virus family. They include herpes simplex virus-1 (HSV-1) and herpes simplex virus-2 (HSV-2), herpes zoster (HZV, also known as varicella-zoster virus or VZV), cytomegalovirus (CMV), and others.


The two types of herpes virus that most commonly affect the eyes are herpes simplex virus-1 (HSV-1) (the same virus that causes cold sores on the lips) and varicella-zoster virus (VZV; herpes zoster), which causes chickenpox in childhood and shingles in adulthood.
Less commonly, cytomegalovirus can cause eye disease in immunocompromised people, such as HIV-infected patients with low T cell counts.


Herpes can be contagious. People with active corneal herpes simplex and herpes zoster have live virus in their tears, as well as skin vesicles in chickenpox and shingles rashes. Careful hand washing is important, particularly when in contact with unimmunized babies and children, as well as people with weakened immune systems.
Herpes Viral Infections of the Eye Center
Eye Diseases Pictures Slideshow 
Pink Eye Slideshow Pictures
Eyes and Eye Conditions Quiz
Patient Comments: Herpes of the Eye - Treatment
Patient Comments: Herpes of the Eye - Symptoms at Time of Diagnosis
Patient Comments: Herpes of the Eye - Experience
Find a local Eye Doctor in your town
What are herpes viruses?
What causes herpes eye infections?
Is ocular herpes contagious?
How do people transmit ocular herpes?
What parts of the eyes are susceptible to herpes viruses?
Who is at risk for herpes infections of the eyes?
What is the incubation period for ocular herpes?
What are the signs and symptoms of herpes eye infections?
What health care professionals diagnose and treat ocular herpes?
How do health care professionals diagnose herpes eye infections?
What are treatment options for herpes eye infections?
What are the possible risks and complications of untreated herpes eye infections?
What is the prognosis of herpes eye infections?
Is it possible to prevent herpes eye infections?

            
            Readers Comments 3
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
