



Hoarseness is an abnormal change in the voice caused by a variety of 
conditions. The voice may have changes in pitch and volume, ranging from a deep, 
harsh voice to a weak, raspy voice. 


Hoarseness is generally caused by irritation of, or 
injury to, the vocal 
cords. The larynx (also referred 
to as the voice box), is the portion of the respiratory (breathing) tract 
containing the vocal cords. The cartilaginous outer wall of the larynx is 
commonly referred to as the "Adams apple." The vocal cords are two bands of 
muscle that form a "V" inside the larynx. When we sing or 
speak, the vocal cords vibrate and produce sound. 



Hoarseness can be caused by a number of conditions. The 
most common cause of hoarseness is acute laryngitis (inflammation of the vocal 
cords) caused most often by an 
upper respiratory tract infection (usually viral), and less 
commonly from overuse or misuse of the voice (such as from yelling or singing). 

Other causes of hoarseness include:
Hoarseness Center
Heartburn Slideshow: Foods to Eat, Foods to Avoid
Digestive Disease Myths
Take the GERD Quiz
Patient Comments: Hoarseness - Causes
Patient Comments: Hoarseness - Treatments
Patient Comments: Hoarseness - Experience
Patient Comments: Hoarseness - Signs and Symptoms
Find a local Ear, Nose, & Throat Doctor in your town
Hoarseness facts
What is hoarseness?
What causes hoarseness?
What are the signs and symptoms of hoarseness?
How are the causes of hoarseness diagnosed?
What is the treatment for hoarseness?
How is hoarseness prevented?
Hoarseness is an abnormal change in the voice.
The most common cause of hoarseness is 
	acute laryngitis.
The underlying cause of hoarseness can usually be diagnosed by a 
health care professional based on the patient's history and physical exam. 
The treatment for hoarseness depends on the underlying cause. 
Hoarseness can be prevented by avoiding excessive strenuous voice use and 
	smoking cessation.

            
            Readers Comments 6
        

            
            Share Your Story
        

            
            Readers Comments 32
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
benign vocal cord nodules, cysts or polyps,
gastroesophageal reflux (GERD),
allergies, 
inhalation of respiratory tract irritants,
	smoking,
thyroid problems,
trauma to the larynx/vocal cords,
	neurological 
conditions (such as Parkinson's disease and
	strokes), and 
cancer of the larynx.
