

Homocysteine is an amino acid produced by the body by chemically altering adenosine. Amino acids are naturally made products, which are the building blocks of all the proteins in the body. Most labs report normal ranges of homocysteine as about 4-15 µml/L.


Homocystinuria was discovered in 1962 by two different groups of researchers. In 1969, Dr. Kilmer S. McCully reported that children born with a genetic disorder called homocystinuria, which causes the homocysteine levels to be very high, sometimes died at a very young age with advanced atherosclerosis in their arteries. Homocysteine levels in the blood may be elevated for many reasons. More specifically, these reasons can be divided into severe genetic causes and other milder causes.




Homocystinuria was discovered in 1962 by two different groups of researchers. In 1969, Dr. Kilmer S. McCully reported that children born with a genetic disorder called homocystinuria, which causes the homocysteine levels to be very high, sometimes died at a very young age with advanced atherosclerosis in their arteries. Homocysteine levels in the blood may be elevated for many reasons. More specifically, these reasons can be divided into severe genetic causes and other milder causes.


Mild elevation in homocysteine levels (hyperhomocysteinemia) are common, and seen in about 5% to 12% of the general population. In specific populations such as, alcoholics (due to poor vitamin intake) or patients with chronic kidney disease, this may be more common. The severe genetic form, homocystinuria, is rare (0.02%).
Homocysteine Blood Test: Normal and Elevated Levels Center
A Visual Guide to Heart Disease
Medical Illustrations of the Heart Image Collection
Take the Heart Disease Quiz!
Patient Comments: Homocysteine - Elevated Levels
Patient Comments: Homocysteine - Lowering Levels
Patient Comments: Homocysteine - Testing
What is the definition of homocysteine? What is it?
Can elevated homocysteine levels be genetic? When was homocystinuria discovered?
What are hyperhomycysteinemia and homocystinuria? Are they inherited (genetic)?
How many people have elevated homocysteine levels, and who gets the condition?
What are the signs and symptoms of homocystinuria?
What are the more common causes of hyperhomocysteinemia?
How can homocysteine levels be lowered?
Who should get tested for elevated homocysteine levels? How is it treated?
Does lowering homocysteine level prevent heart attacks and strokes?
Does lowering homocysteine levels prevent heart attacks and strokes?

            
            Readers Comments 8
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
