



Calcium is a mineral that is important in the regulation and processes of many body functions including bone formation, hormone release, muscle contraction, and nerve and brain function. Hypercalcemia is the term that refers to elevated levels of calcium in the bloodstream.
Calcium levels are tightly regulated in the body. Calcium regulation is primarily controlled by parathyroid hormone (PTH), vitamin D, and calcitonin. 
Together, these three hormones act on the bones, the kidneys, and the GI tract to regulate calcium levels in the 
bloodstream. 
Hypercalcemia (Elevated Calcium Levels) Center
Hemophilia Quiz: Test Your IQ
Anemia Symptoms, Causes, Types, and Treatment
Take the Blood Disorders Quiz
Patient Comments: Hypercalcemia - Describe Your Experience
Patient Comments: Hypercalcemia - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Hypercalcemia - Treatment
Hypercalcemia facts
Hypercalcemia Introduction
What are the causes of hypercalcemia?
What are the signs and symptoms of hypercalcemia?
How is hypercalcemia diagnosed?
How is hypercalcemia treated?
What is the prognosis for hypercalcemia?
Can hypercalcemia be prevented?
Calcium is important for bone strength, as well as muscle and nerve function
Calcium levels in the bloodstream are regulated by PTH, vitamin D, and calcitonin
Hypercalcemia can vary in severity and in chronicity
The main cause of hypercalcemia is hyperparathyroidism
Malignancies may be associated with hypercalcemia, and the presence of hypercalcemia usually heralds a worse prognosis
The signs and symptoms of hypercalcemia can be remembered by the phrase "moans, stones, groans, and bones."
Treatment depends on the underlying cause of hypercalcemia as well as the degree of severity
Both surgical and medical treatments are available as treatment options
Prognosis depends on the underlying cause of hypercalcemia

            
            Readers Comments 20
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
Parathyroid hormone is a hormone produced by the parathyroid glands, which are four small glands that surround the thyroid and are found in the anterior part of the lower neck. 
Vitamin D is obtained through a process that begins with sun exposure to the skin, the process then continues in the liver and kidneys. Vitamin D can also be found in foods such as eggs and dairy products. 
Calcitonin is produced in specialized cells in the thyroid gland. 
