



Hypothyroidism (overactive thyroid) is a condition in which the thyroid gland produces an abnormally low amount of thyroid hormone. Many disorders result in hypothyroidism, which may directly or indirectly involve the thyroid gland. Because thyroid hormone affects growth, development, and many cellular processes, inadequate thyroid hormone has widespread consequences for the body.


Subclinical hypothyroidism refers to a state in which people do not have symptoms of hypothyroidism and have a normal amount of thyroid hormone in their blood. The only abnormality is an increased TSH on the person’s blood work. This implies that the pituitary gland is working extra hard to maintain a normal circulating thyroid hormone level and that the thyroid gland requires extra stimulation by the pituitary to produce adequate hormones. Most people with subclinical hypothyroidism can expect the disease to progress to obvious hypothyroidism, in which symptoms and signs occur.
Hypothyroidism Symptoms, Diet, Natural and Medical Treatments, and Tests Center
Hyperthyroidism Slideshow Pictures
Take the Thyroid Disorder Quiz
Thyroid Symptoms and Solutions Slideshow Pictures
Thyroid FAQs
Patient Comments: Hypothyroidism - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Hypothyroidism - Treatments
Patient Comments: Hypothyroidism - Diet
Patient Comments: Hypothyroidism - Personal Experience
Patient Comments: Hypothyroidism - Diagnosis
Patient Comments: Hypothyroidism - Causes
Find a local Endocrinologist in your town
Hypothyroidism (underactive thyroid) definition and facts
What is hypothyroidism?
What is subclinical hypothyroidism?
What are the signs and symptoms of hypothyroidism?
What  are the symptoms of severe hypothyroidism? What is myxedema coma?
Where is the thyroid located? What are thyroid hormones?
What causes hypothyroidism?
Are there special foods or diets for hypothyroidism?
What tests diagnose hypothyroidism?
What is the treatment for hypothyroidism?
What happens if hypothyroidism goes untreated? What are the complications?
What should I do if I have signs or symptoms of hypothyroidism?

            
            Readers Comments 22
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
Hypothyroidism (underactive thyroid) refers to any state in which a person's thyroid hormone production is below normal.
Hyperthyroidism (overactive thyroid) is an overproduction of thyroid hormones.
The thyroid is butterfly shaped gland, and the pituitary gland (another gland located in the brain) regulates it.
The symptoms of hypothyroidism are depend on the deficiency of thyroid hormone, but can include:Weight gainIncreased cholesterol levelsDepressionFatigueHair lossMemory lossDry, rough skinConstipationSwelling of the legsDecreased concentrationMuscle crampsVague aches and pains
Weight gain
Increased cholesterol levels
Depression
Fatigue
Hair loss
Memory loss
Dry, rough skin
Constipation
Swelling of the legs
Decreased concentration
Muscle cramps
Vague aches and pains
Hypothyroidism is a very common thyroid disease.
Many diseases can cause overactive thyroid. Hashimoto’s thyroiditis (autoimmune thyroiditis) is the most common cause of overactive thyroid in the US.
Other causes of hypothyroidism include autoimmune disorders, thyroid removal, and prescription medications. Less often, too little or too much iodine in the diet (iron deficiency) and pituitary disease cause hypothyroidism.
A blood test is used to confirm the diagnosis of hypothyroidism.
Some people with an underactive thyroid will need life-long treatment with medications.

            
            Readers Comments 9
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
