

Hypothyroidism during Pregnancy Causes, Guidelines, Diet, and Effects on the Baby Center
Stages of Pregnancy Slideshow Pictures
Slideshow of Early Pregnancy Symptoms
Early Pregnancy Symptoms Quiz
Patient Comments: Hypothyroidism During Pregnancy - Diet and Medication
Patient Comments: Hypothyroidism During Pregnancy - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Hypothyroidism During Pregnancy - Diagnosis
Find a local Obstetrician-Gynecologist in your town
Hypothyroidism during pregnancy facts
What is hypothyroidism?
What is the thyroid gland? Where is it located and what does it do?
What are the signs and symptoms of thyroid disease? What causes it?
How is hyperthyroidism treated during pregnancy?
Does hypothyroidism during pregnancy hurt the fetus?
How can you avoid the complications of hypothyroidism in pregnancy?
How early does the mother's thyroid hormone affect the unborn baby?

            
            Readers Comments 4
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
Hypothyroidism, wherein the thyroid gland produces an inadequate amount of thyroid hormone, is a common disorder, particularly in women of childbearing age.
Hypothyroidism of the mother during pregnancy may result in developmental delay in the child.
Treatment of hypothyroidism requires thyroid hormone medication.
There may be indications to start thyroid hormone therapy in women who are borderline in thyroid function and who are either pregnant or desiring pregnancy.
The treatment goal of hypothyroidism in pregnancy is to maintain a thyroid hormone level within high normal range.
Pregnant women who are on thyroid hormone should have blood testing frequently during pregnancy as requirements may change.
Early studies found that children born to mothers with severe, untreated hypothyroidism during pregnancy had lower IQ scores and impaired psychomotor (mental and motor) development. If properly controlled, often by increasing the amount of thyroid hormone, women with hypothyroidism can have healthy, unaffected babies.
