

Hypothermia is defined as a body temperature (core, or internal body temperature) of less than about 95 F (35 C). Usually, hypothermia occurs when the body's temperature regulation is overwhelmed by a cold environment. However, in the medical and lay literature there are essentially two major classifications, accidental hypothermia and intentional hypothermia.
Accidental hypothermia usually occurs from an exposure to cold that results in lowering the body temperature.
Intentional hypothermia is body temperature lowering induced usually for a medical procedure.
This article will focus on accidental hypothermia. Hypothermia is a medical emergency that, when quickly and appropriately treated, people can recover with little or no consequences.
Body temperature, when discussing hypothermia, is usually termed "core" temperature. This temperature is the temperature measured inside the body. It's a measurement that is most accurately done by a rectal thermometer, a rectal probe thermometer that has a constant temperature readout or by a bladder or esophageal temperature device. Temperatures taken by other methods may not adequately measure core temperature.


The highest risk factor for hypothermia is losing body heat due to exposure to cold weather or partial or complete immersion in cold water. Examples of include:
Other risk factors for hypothermia include:
Some medical diseases or conditions may decrease the body's ability to regulate its internal temperature, for example:


The body parts most susceptible to injury in patients with hypothermia are those that may suffer from poor circulation or often have the least protection from the cold environment (feet, hands, nose and ears). These extremities usually cool faster than the body's core. The internal organ most susceptible to hypothermia is the heart (dysrhythmias).


The cause of hypothermia is the inability of the body's temperature regulation system to keep the body's core temperature between 35.6 C and 37.5 C (96.08 F and 99.5 F), so any body temperature below about 35.6 C (96.08 F) is considered hypothermic by many doctors.
The body regulates the core temperature by either:
Hypothermia Center
First Aid Essentials Slideshow
Take the Trauma and First Aid Quiz
First Aid Sprains & Strains Slideshow Pictures
Patient Comments: Hypothermia - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Hypothermia - Experience
Patient Comments: Hypothermia - Causes
Find a local Family Physician in your town
What is hypothermia?
What are the risk factors for hypothermia?
What body parts are more susceptible to hypothermia?
What causes hypothermia?
What are the signs and symptoms of hypothermia?
What are the symptoms of hypothermia in infants and children?
Can a person experience hypothermia indoors?
When should I call my doctor for hypothermia?
How is hypothermia diagnosed?
What is the treatment for hypothermia?
Home remedies for hypothermia
What items should I have to be prepared to prevent hypothermia?
What is the prognosis for hypothermia?

            
            Readers Comments 1
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
Not dressing appropriately for cold weather
Walking on a partially frozen body of water (rivers, lakes, ponds, etc.)
The young and elderly because their bodies do not have the ability to regulate body temperature efficiently
People with mental illness
People with alcohol or drug problems
Some medications
Diabetes
Spinal cord injuries
Burns
Hypothyroidism
Parkinson's disease
Malnutrition

            
            Readers Comments 1
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
generating heat
cooling, or
heat conservation. Heat conservation can be accomplished by peripheral vasoconstriction and by behavior; heat production is done by shivering and by increasing levels of thyroxine and epinephrine.
