

Inflammatory Breast Cancer Center
Breast Cancer Slideshow
Take the Breast Cancer Quiz
Breast Cancer Screening
Patient Comments: Inflammatory Breast Cancer - Symptoms & Signs
Find a local Oncologist in your town
Inflammatory breast cancer facts
What is inflammatory breast cancer?
What are the causes and risk factors for inflammatory breast cancer?
How is inflammatory breast cancer different from other breast cancers?
What are the signs and symptoms of inflammatory breast cancer?
What types of doctors treat inflammatory breast cancer?
What tests and exams do health care professionals use to diagnose inflammatory breast cancer?
What are the stages of inflammatory breast cancer?
Are there home remedies for inflammatory breast cancer?
What is the treatment for inflammatory breast cancer?
What are the survival rates and prognosis for inflammatory breast cancer?
Is it possible to prevent inflammatory breast cancer?
Inflammatory breast cancer (inflammatory breast carcinoma) is breast cancer that has spread to the lymphatic system, causing symptoms of inflammation (redness, swelling, tenderness) in the breast.
Symptoms of inflammatory breast cancer includeswelling,redness,skin changes,tenderness,dimpling of the skin of the breast or nipple,heaviness, andpossibly a lump or mass in the breast.
swelling,
redness,
skin changes,
tenderness,
dimpling of the skin of the breast or nipple,
heaviness, and
possibly a lump or mass in the breast.
As with other types of breast cancer, a tissue biopsy is done to confirm the diagnosis of breast cancer.
Inflammatory breast cancers are stage III or stage IV at the time of diagnosis due to the spread of the cancer cells into the lymphatic system.
Treatment of inflammatory breast cancers is multimodal and involves surgery, chemotherapy, and radiation therapy.
Inflammatory breast cancer is more aggressive and tends to have a worse prognosis than other types of breast cancer.
Targeted therapies such as trastuzumab (Herceptin) or hormonal therapies may also be given, depending upon whether or not the tumor cells express hormone receptors or the HER2 protein.
Survival rates for inflammatory breast cancer are not as favorable as those for other types of breast cancer.
