



Insulin is a hormone produced by the beta cells of the pancreas. These cells are scattered throughout the pancreas in small clusters known as the islets of Langerhans. The insulin produced is released into the blood stream and travels throughout the body. Insulin is an essential hormone that has many actions within the body. Most actions of insulin are directed at metabolism (control) of carbohydrates (sugars and starches), lipids (fats), and proteins. Insulin also regulates the functions of the body's cells, including their growth. Insulin is critical for the body's use of glucose as energy.
Insulin resistance (IR) is a condition in which the body's cells become resistant to the effects of insulin. That is, the normal response to a given amount of insulin is reduced. As a result, higher levels of insulin are needed in order for insulin to have its proper effects, and the pancreas compensates by trying to produce more insulin. This resistance occurs in response to the body's own insulin (endogenous) or when insulin is administered by injection (exogenous).
With insulin resistance, the pancreas produces more and more insulin until the pancreas can no longer produce sufficient insulin for the body's demands, and then blood sugar rises. Insulin resistance is a risk factor for development of diabetes and heart disease.
Insulin Resistance Center
Type 2 Diabetes: Learn the Warning Signs
Diabetes Friendly Dining
Type 2 Diabetes: Test Your Medical IQ
Patient Comments: Insulin Resistance - Describe Your Experience
Patient Comments: Insulin Resistance - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Insulin Resistance - Causes
Find a local Endocrinologist in your town
Insulin resistance definition and facts
What is insulin resistance?
What are the signs and symptoms of insulin resistance?
What causes insulin resistance?
What is the relationship between insulin resistance and diabetes?
What are normal insulin levels?
What medical conditions are associated with insulin resistance?
Who is at risk for insulin resistance?
Which specialties of doctors treat insulin resistance?
Is there a test for insulin resistance?
Can insulin resistance be cured?
Is there a special diet plan for treating insulin resistance?
What foods help prevent type 2 diabetes?
Can exercise totreat insulin resistance?
What medications treat insulin resistance?
Can insulin resistance be prevented?
What is the prognosis for a person with insulin resistance?
What's new in insulin resistance?
Insulin resistance may be part of the metabolic syndrome, and it has been associated with higher risk of developing heart disease.
Insulin resistance precedes the development of type 2 diabetes (T2D).
The causes of insulin resistance include both genetic (inherited) and lifestyle factors.
There are no specific signs and symptoms of insulin resistance.
Insulin resistance is associated with other medical conditions, includingfatty liver,arteriosclerosis,acanthosis nigerians,skin tags, andreproductive abnormalities in women.
fatty liver,
arteriosclerosis,
acanthosis nigerians,
skin tags, and
reproductive abnormalities in women.
Individuals are more likely to have insulin resistance if they have any of several associated medical conditions. They also are more likely to be insulin resistant if obese or of Latino, African-American, Native American, or Asian-American heritage.
While there are genetic risk factors, insulin resistance can be managed with diet, exercise, and proper medication.
The test for insulin resistance is the measurement of fasting blood glucose and insulin levels.
Insulin resistance is treated by lifestyle modifications and in some cases, medications.
In some cases insulin resistance cannot be prevented, but modifiable risk factors include maintaining a healthy weight and getting regular exercise.

            
            Readers Comments 36
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
