



While the general public understands that internal bleeding means bleeding that can't be seen on the outside of the body, medical personnel tend to use terms that describe more precisely the location inside the body where the bleeding is found. The internal bleeding may occur within tissues, organs, or in cavities of the body including the head, spinal canal, chest, and abdomen. Examples of other potential sites of bleeding include the eye and within tissues that line the heart, muscles, and joints.
Bleeding outside the body is quite easy to recognize. If the skin is damaged by a laceration, puncture, or abrasion, blood can be witnessed as it streams out of the body. The scalp and face have a very rich blood supply and are notorious for demonstrating massive blood loss.
Internal bleeding may be much more difficult to identify. It may not be evident for many hours after it begins, and symptoms may only occur when there is significant blood loss or if a blood clot is large enough to compress an organ and prevent it from functioning properly.
Internal bleeding occurs when damage to an artery or vein allows blood to escape the circulatory system and collect inside the body. The amount of bleeding depends upon the amount of damage to an organ, the blood vessels that supply it, and the body's ability to repair breaks in the walls of the blood vessels. The repair mechanisms available include both the blood clotting system and the ability of blood vessels to go into spasm to decrease blood flow to an injured area.
People who take blood-thinning or anti-clotting medication are more prone to bleeding than people who do not take these medications. These individuals may experience significant bleeding even with relatively minor injury or illness, and the risk of bleeding needs to be balanced against the benefits of taking the medication. A variety of "blood thinning" medications are now prescribed for many diseases.
Anticoagulation medications include:
Antiplatelet medications include:
Some people have genetic or inborn errors of the blood clotting system. Minor injuries may cause major bleeding in these people. Hemophilia and von Willebrand disease are two examples of hereditary clotting disorders.
Internal Bleeding Symptoms, Signs, Causes,  and Treatment Center
Caring for Wounds Slideshow
First Aid Sprains & Strains Slideshow Pictures
Take the Trauma and First Aid Quiz
Patient Comments: Internal Bleeding: Cause of Bleeding - Experience
Patient Comments: Internal Bleeding - Signs and Symptoms
Patient Comments: Internal Bleeding - Diagnosis
Patient Comments: Internal Bleeding - Treatment
Internal bleeding definition and facts
What is internal bleeding?
What causes internal bleeding?
What are the signs and symptoms of internal bleeding?
How is internal bleeding diagnosed?
What is the treatment for internal bleeding
What are the complications of internal bleeding?
Internal bleeding may occur in many areas of the body and may cause significant local inflammation and pain. If enough bleeding occurs, the person may go into shock.
Symptoms and signs of internal bleeding depend on where the bleeding is coming from, but may include:HeadacheStiff neckConfusionStroke symptoms (vision loss, weakness, and slurred speech)LightheadednessShortness of breathLow blood pressureBlood in the stoolRectal bleedingBlood in the urine
Headache
Stiff neck
Confusion
Stroke symptoms (vision loss, weakness, and slurred speech)
Lightheadedness
Shortness of breath
Low blood pressure
Blood in the stool
Rectal bleeding
Blood in the urine
There are numerous causes of internal bleeding, examples include:TraumaBroken bonesPregnancyBleeding after surgeryAlcoholMedications
Trauma
Broken bones
Pregnancy
Bleeding after surgery
Alcohol
Medications
Bleeding is a recognized complication of anti-coagulation and anti-platelet medications. The benefits of taking these medications need to be balanced against the risk of bleeding.
Bleeding is never normal in pregnancy and may be a sign of miscarriage or ectopic pregnancy.
If you think you may be bleeding internally, call your doctor or go to your nearest Urgent Care.
warfarin (Coumadin)
Heparin
enoxaparin (Lovenox)
rivaroxaban (Xarelto)
edoxaban (Savaysa)
dabigatran (Pradaxa)
Aspirin
clopidogrel (Plavix)
prasugrel (Effient)
ticagrelor (Brilinta)
