

10 Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS)  Symptoms, Diet, Triggers, Causes, Diet (Foods to Avoid), and Treatment Center
Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS) Slideshow Pictures
Digestive Disease Myths
Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS) Quiz
IBS FAQs
Patient Comments: Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS) - Diagnosis
Patient Comments: Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS) - Treatments
Patient Comments: Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS) - Diet
Patient Comments: Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS) - Medications
Patient Comments: Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS) - Symptoms
Find a local Gastroenterologist in your town
Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) definition and facts
What is IBS?
What are the signs and symptoms of IBS?
What causes IBS?
What are IBS-D (IBS with diarrhea) and IBS-C (IBS with constipation)?
IBS vs. IBD are the same bowel disease?
IBS vs. SIBO (small intestinal bacterial overgrowth)? Are they the same disease?
What tests diagnose IBS?
Is there an IBS diet? What are foods to avoid and eat?
What is a low FODMAP diet?
What is the treatment for IBS?
What medications are used in the treatment and management of IBS-D and IBS-D?
What other drugs are used in the treatment of IBS symptoms and signs?
What medications are used in the treatment of pain and cramping?
What natural and home remedies or other lifestyle changes may help IBS symptoms and signs?
What are potential complications of irritable bowel syndrome (IBS)?
Is it possible to prevent irritable bowel syndrome (IBS)?
What is the prognosis for 
a person with irritable bowel syndrome (IBS)?
Which types of doctors treat IBS?
Irritable bowel syndrome, or IBS, or spastic colon, is a type of gastrointestinal disorder. IBS symptoms and signs include:Abdominal painAltered bowel habitsIncreased gasBloating (distention)CrampingFood intolerance
Abdominal pain
Altered bowel habits
Increased gas
Bloating (distention)
Cramping
Food intolerance
The exact cause of irritable bowel syndrome is unknown and may be due to multiple factors.
There are different forms of this functional disease. IBS with diarrhea (IBS-D) is characterized by chronic or recurrent diarrhea, while IBS with constipation (IBS-C) is characterized by abdominal pain or discomfort associated with constipation. Some people experience alternating symptoms of diarrhea or constipation.
A diagnosis of IBS is based on the duration (at least six months) and frequency of signs and symptoms (at least three times a month). A new blood test may help identify some forms of IBS.
There is no known cure for this condition, but there are many treatment options to reduce or eliminate symptoms. Treatment includes dietary modifications, lifestyle changes, and prescription medications.
There is no specific diet for IBS, and different people react differently to different foods. It is important for people with IBS to identify foods that trigger their symptoms so they can avoid them. In general, many people with the condition find it helpful to increase dietary fiber, drink plenty of water, avoid soda, and eat smaller meals.
It is best to talk to a primary-care physician or a gastroenterologist about the best way to manage IBS symptoms and signs.
