



The spine has a series of normal curves when viewed from the side. These curves help absorb the loads applied to the spine from the weight of the body. The cervical spine (neck) and lumbar spine (lower back) have a normal inward curvature that health care professionals call lordosis or lordotic curvature by which the spine is bent backward. The thoracic spine (upper back) has a normal outward curvature that is health care providers call
kyphosis or the kyphotic curve by which the spine is bent forward. The official medical term for an abnormal curvature of the thoracic spine is hyperkyphosis. However, abnormal kyphosis and hyperkyphosis are commonly referred to as kyphosis by the medical community, so in this discussion, the term kyphosis will be used to discuss abnormal kyphosis. In other words, kyphosis is a deformity of the spine of the upper back causing an exaggerated outward curve.
The spine is normally straight when looking from the front. Scoliosis is an abnormal curve when viewed from the front. Scoliosis can occur from bony abnormalities of the spine at birth, growth abnormalities especially with adolescence, degenerative spinal changes in adulthood, or abnormal twisting of the vertebrae because of muscle spasm after an injury.
The normal curves of the spine allow the head to balance directly over the pelvis. If one or more of these curves is either too great or too small, the head may not properly balance over the pelvis. This can lead to back pain, stiffness, and an altered gait or walking pattern.
Kyphosis Center
Low Back Pain Slideshow
Take the Back Pain Quiz!
Back Pain Myths & Facts Pictures
Patient Comments: Kyphosis - Treatments
Patient Comments: Kyphosis - Symptoms and Signs
Patient Comments: Kyphosis - Causes and Types
Patient Comments: Kyphosis - Tests
Patient Comments: Kyphosis - Therapy and Prognosis
Find a local Orthopedic Surgeon  in your town
Kyphosis facts
What is kyphosis?
What are the signs and symptoms of kyphosis?
What causes abnormal kyphosis? What are the types of kyphosis?
When should you seek medical attention?
What tests is your physician likely to obtain?
What is the treatment for abnormal kyphosis?
What are the potential complications of surgery for kyphosis?
What ongoing care is required for patients with kyphosis?
How can I prevent kyphosis?
What is the prognosis for kyphosis?
There are three main types of kyphosis: postural, Scheuermann's, and congenital.
Most forms of kyphosis do not require any treatment.
Physical therapy and exercise are often effective in postural and Scheuermann's kyphosis.
Significant congenital kyphosis and more severe cases of Scheuermann's kyphosis require surgery.
