

Migraine Headache Symptoms, Causes, Medicine, Treatment, and Relief Center
Take the Migraines Quiz
A Visual Guide to Migraine Headaches Slideshow
Headache and Migraine Triggers Slideshow
Patient Comments: Migraine - Triggers
Patient Comments: Migraine - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Migraine - Treatment
Patient Comments: Migraine - Relief
Patient Comments: Migraine Headache - Causes
Find a local Neurologist in your town
Migraine headache definition and facts
What is a migraine headache?
What is migraine with aura?
What are the signs and symptoms of migraine headaches?
What causes migraine headaches?
What foods and other things trigger migraines?
How long do migraines last?
What are the treatments guidelines for migraine headaches?
Medications for acute and chronic migraines
Narcotics for pain and other drugs for migraines
What natural home remedies and and lifestyle changes relieve migraines?
What is the treatment for migraines during pregnancy? Can you take medication?
What is the treatment for migraines in children?
What is the prognosis for a person with migraines? Is there a cure?
Can the frequency of migraines be prevented?
What is the difference between migraines and tension headaches?
How can you tell if it is a migraine or a different type of headache?
Migraine headache is a result of specific changes within the brain. It causes severe head pain that is often accompanied by sensitivity to light, sound, or smells.
Common symptoms include:Eye painSensitivity to light or soundNauseaVomitingSevere pain, usually on one side of the head that some individuals describe as "pounding"
Eye pain
Sensitivity to light or sound
Nausea
Vomiting
Severe pain, usually on one side of the head that some individuals describe as "pounding"
Types of migraines include:Common migraine (or absence migraine) has no "aura.” About 80%of migraines are common.Classic migraines (migraine with aura) present with an aura before the headache and are more severe than common migraines.A silent or acephalic migraine is a migraine without head pain but with aura and other aspects of migraine.A hemiplegic migraine can have symptoms that mimic a stroke, such as weakness on one side of the body, loss of sensation, or feeling ‘pins and needles.’A retinal migraine causes temporary vision loss in one eye, which can last from minutes to months, but it is usually reversible. This is often a sign of a more serious medical problem, and patients should seek medical care.A chronic migraine is a migraine headache that lasts for more than 15 days per month.Status migrainosus is a constant migraine attack that lasts more than 72 hours.
Common migraine (or absence migraine) has no "aura.” About 80%of migraines are common.
Classic migraines (migraine with aura) present with an aura before the headache and are more severe than common migraines.
A silent or acephalic migraine is a migraine without head pain but with aura and other aspects of migraine.
A hemiplegic migraine can have symptoms that mimic a stroke, such as weakness on one side of the body, loss of sensation, or feeling ‘pins and needles.’
A retinal migraine causes temporary vision loss in one eye, which can last from minutes to months, but it is usually reversible. This is often a sign of a more serious medical problem, and patients should seek medical care.
A chronic migraine is a migraine headache that lasts for more than 15 days per month.
Status migrainosus is a constant migraine attack that lasts more than 72 hours.
Other types of headaches can also cause intense pain, and not all headaches are migraines. For example, some describe the pain of cluster headaches as the worst pain they have experienced. Sinus headaches can also cause pain and inflammation.
The causes of migraines are not known. Changes in neurotransmitter levels within the brain are thought to play a role.
The presence of typical clinical signs and symptoms help diagnose migraines.
Migraines can be triggered by many factors, for example:Hormonal changesStressStrong stimuli like loud noisesCertain foods
Hormonal changes
Stress
Strong stimuli like loud noises
Certain foods
Migraine treatment usually is with over-the-counter (OTC) or prescription drugs.
Prescription medications used to relieve the pain of migraine include triptans (a class of drugs), for example:sumatriptan (Imitrex, Alsuma, Imitrex STATdose System, Sumavel DosePro, Zecuity, Treximet)rizatriptan (Maxalt, Maxalt-MLT)eletriptan (Relpax)zolmitriptan (Zomig, Zomig-ZMT)naratriptan Amerge)almotriptan (Axert)frovatriptan (Frova)
sumatriptan (Imitrex, Alsuma, Imitrex STATdose System, Sumavel DosePro, Zecuity, Treximet)
rizatriptan (Maxalt, Maxalt-MLT)
eletriptan (Relpax)
zolmitriptan (Zomig, Zomig-ZMT)
naratriptan Amerge)
almotriptan (Axert)
frovatriptan (Frova)
Erenumab (Aimovig) is a new class of drug called a calcitonin gene-related peptide receptor (CGRP-R) antagonist approved in 2018 to treat migraine. It is a monthy injection used to prevent migraines.
Lifestyle changes like eating a healthy diet and getting exercise may help reduce the frequency of your attacks.Avoid foods that trigger your migraines. This also may reduce the frequency of attacks.Some may find that exercises, for example yoga, promote muscle relaxation are helpful in managing severe pain.Most people with migraines usually are able to manage their condition with a combination of medications and lifestyle changes.Some people may need prescription medications to decrease the frequency of headaches.
Avoid foods that trigger your migraines. This also may reduce the frequency of attacks.
Some may find that exercises, for example yoga, promote muscle relaxation are helpful in managing severe pain.
Most people with migraines usually are able to manage their condition with a combination of medications and lifestyle changes.
Some people may need prescription medications to decrease the frequency of headaches.
Up to 25% of people will have a migraine at some point. Most sufferers are female. It is estimated that after adolescence, the ratio of female to male patients who experience migraines is about 3:1. There seems to be a genetic predisposition, as there is often a strong family history of migraine in patients with this disorder.
