

Narcolepsy Symptoms, Causes, Treatment, and Medication Center
Causes of Fatigue Slideshow Pictures
Sleep Quiz: Test Your Medical IQ
Sleep  Slideshow: Foods That Help or Harm Your Sleep
Patient Comments: Narcolepsy - Treatments
Patient Comments: Narcolepsy - Experience
Patient Comments: Narcolepsy - Excessive Daytime Sleepiness
Patient Comments: Narcolepsy - Hypnagogic Hallucinations
Patient Comments: Narcolepsy - Muscle Control
Find a local Sleep Specialist in your town
Narcolepsy defintion and facts
What is narcolepsy?
What are the signs and symptoms of narcolepsy?
Narcolepsy with cataplexy symptoms
Hypnagogic hallucinations and excessive daytime sleepiness (EDS) symptoms
Sleep paralysis symptoms
What causes narcolepsy?
How is narcolepsy diagnosed?
What medications are used for the treatment for narcolepsy with cataplexy?
What medications are used for the treatment of narcolepsy with EDS?
Non-drug treatments
Can narcolepsy be cured?
How many people have narcolepsy?
For more information on narcolepsy
What specialists treat narcolepsy?
Narcolepsy is a chronic disease of the central nervous system. Symptoms include excessive daytime sleepiness (EDS), sudden loss of muscle tone (cataplexy), distorted perceptions (hypnagogic hallucinations), inability to move or talk (sleep paralysis), disturbed nocturnal sleep, and automatic behavior.
Narcolepsy usually begins in teenagers or young adults and affects both sexes equally.
Abnormalities in the structure and function of a particular group of nerve cells in the brain called hypocretin neurons are thought to play a role in the development of narcolepsy.
The diagnosis of narcolepsy is based on a clinical evaluation, specific questionnaires, sleep logs or diaries, and the results of sleep laboratory tests (polysomnography and multiple sleep latency test).
Treatment options for narcolepsy include drug and behavioral modification therapies and disease-specific education of the patient and family members. The treatment is individualized, depending on the types and severity of the symptoms, the life conditions of the patients, and the specific goals of therapy.
Optimal management usually takes weeks to months to achieve and requires continued communication among the physician, patient, family members, and others.
Alerting medications are used for the treatment of excessive daytime sleepiness. Amphetamines and methylphenidate (Ritalin) are general CNS stimulants that decrease sleepiness and improve alertness. Modafinil (Provigil) and armondafinil (Nuvigil) have alerting effects similar to those of the traditional stimulants but has less undesirable side effects.
Anticataplectic medications are used to treat cataplexy, hypnagogic hallucinations, and sleep paralysis. Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) are often effective in controlling cataplexy, but also frequently produce side effects that limit their use.
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are also useful in the treatment of cataplexy and their side effects are milder. Sodium oxybate (Xyrem) is a medication with anticataplectic effects that also improves disturbed nocturnal sleep.
Behavioral approaches to treating narcolepsy include establishing a structured sleep-wake cycle and planned naps, and involve diet, exercise, and occupational, marriage, and family counseling.
