



Neutropenia is a condition in which the number of neutrophils in the bloodstream is decreased. Neutrophils are a type of white blood cell also known as polymorphonuclear leukocytes or PMNs. Neutropenia reduces the body's ability to fight off bacterial infections.
White blood cells are also known as leukocytes. There are five major types of circulating white blood cells:
Some white blood cells, called granulocytes, are filled with microscopic granules that are little sacs containing enzymes (compounds that digest microorganisms). Neutrophils, eosinophils, and basophils are all granulocytes and are part of the innate immune system with somewhat nonspecific, broad-based activity. They do not respond exclusively to specific antigens, as do the lymphocytes (B-cells and T-cells).
Neutrophils contain enzymes that help the cell kill and digest microorganisms it has engulfed by a process known as phagocytosis. The mature neutrophil has a segmented nucleus (it is often called a 'seg' or 'poly'), while the immature neutrophil has a band-shape nucleus (it is called a band). Neutrophils are made in the bone marrow and released into the bloodstream. The neutrophil has a life-span of about three days.
Neutropenia Causes, Symptoms, Ranges, Levels, and Treatment Center
Patient Comments: Neutropenia - Describe Your Experience
Patient Comments: Neutropenia - Treatments
Patient Comments: Neutropenia - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Neutropenia - Diagnosis
Find a local Hematologist in your town
Neutropenia definition and facts
What is neutropenia?
What are the signs and symptoms of neutropenia?
What causes neutropenia?
What are normal neutropenia levels and ranges?
Does neutropenia put a person at risk for bacterial infections?
How is neutropenia diagnosed?
What is the treatment for neutropenia?
Neutropenia is a condition in which the number of neutrophils (a type of white blood cell) in the bloodstream is decreased, affecting the body's ability to fight off infections.
Neutropenia is defined as an absolute neutrophil count (ANC) of less than 1500 per microliter (1500/microL); severe neutropenia is defined as an ANC of less than 500/microL.
Neutropenia may be caused by or associated with numerous medical conditions including congenital disorders of the bone marrow, cancer chemotherapy, infections, certain medications (drug-induced neutropenia), and autoimmune disorders.
Most infections that occur as complications of neutropenia are due to bacteria that are normally present on the skin or in the gastrointestinal or urinary tract.
Treatment depends upon the cause and severity of the condition as well as the underlying disease state responsible for the neutropenia.

            
            Readers Comments 49
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
basophils,
eosinophils,
lymphocytes (T-cells and B-cells,
monocytes, and
neutrophils.
