



External otitis or "swimmer's ear" in children and adults is an infection of the skin covering the outer ear and ear canal. The ear infection can be short-term (acute) or chronic, which lasts for a long period.
Swimmer's Ear Infection (External Otitis) Symptoms, Pain Remedies, Treatment, and Prevention Center
Anatomy of an Ear Infection Slideshow Pictures
Take the Ear Infection Quiz
Ear Health Quiz
Ear Infection (Otitis Media) FAQs
Patient Comments: Swimmer's Ear - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Swimmer's Ear - Treatment
Patient Comments: Swimmer's Ear - Prevention 
Patient Comments: Swimmer's Ear - Experience
Find a local Ear, Nose, & Throat Doctor in your town
Swimmer's ear in adults and children definition and facts 
What is "swimmer's ear" infection in children and adults?
What are the signs and symptoms of swimmer's ear in children and adults?
What causes acute swimmer's ear infection in children an adults?
What are the symptoms, signs, and causes of chronic swimmer's ear? 
Can objects, bugs, or insects in the ear cause outer ear infections?
What natural home remedies, eardrops, or antibiotics treat and cure swimmer's ear?
What is the prevention for swimmer's ear?

            
            Share Your Story
        
Swimmer's ear, or external otitis, is typically a bacterial infection of the skin of the outer ear canal. In contrast to a middle ear infection, swimmer's ear is an infection of the outer ear.
Swimmer's ear can occur in both acute and chronic forms.
Excessive water exposure and water trapped in the ear is a risk factor for developing swimmer's ear. Putting cotton swabs in the ear canal also may cause an external ear infection.
Early symptoms of an outer ear infection includeitchy ears,a feeling of fullness,swelling of the ear canal,drainage, andpain.
itchy ears,
a feeling of fullness,
swelling of the ear canal,
drainage, and
pain.
Home remedies to relieve ear pain, treat other signs and symptoms, and cure an outer ear infection include:Keep the ears dry at all times. .Use earplugs or a cotton ball with Vaseline on the outside to plug the ears when showering or swimming.Don't scratch the inside of the ear because this may make the condition worse.Home made eardrops using mineral oil or hydrogen peroxide.
Keep the ears dry at all times. .
Use earplugs or a cotton ball with Vaseline on the outside to plug the ears when showering or swimming.
Don't scratch the inside of the ear because this may make the condition worse.
Home made eardrops using mineral oil or hydrogen peroxide.
Frequently, outer ear infections are treated with antibiotic eardrops and avoiding water activities until the infection has been cured.
If the ear is very swollen, a wick may need to be inserted in the ear canal to allow penetration of the eardrops.
Follow your doctor's instructions for use of any eardrops or medications
There are things that you can do to prevent swimmer's ear or an outer ear infection.Take care of your earsDon't scratch the inside of the earsKeep the ears free of waxDon't put objects (even cotton balls or swabs) in the ear.Don't try to remove an object that is stuck the ear. Call your doctor.Home made ear drops using rubbing alcohol and vinegar can be used after swimming to remove water from the ears and help prevent swimmer's ear.
Take care of your ears
Don't scratch the inside of the ears
Keep the ears free of wax
Don't put objects (even cotton balls or swabs) in the ear.
Don't try to remove an object that is stuck the ear. Call your doctor.
Home made ear drops using rubbing alcohol and vinegar can be used after swimming to remove water from the ears and help prevent swimmer's ear.
