

Ovarian Cysts Causes, Signs, Symptoms, Types, and Treatment Center
Ovarian Cysts Pictures Slideshow
Ovarian Cancer Quiz: Test Your Medical IQ
Pelvic Pain Pictures Slideshow
Patient Comments: Ovarian Cysts - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Ovarian Cysts - Treatments
Patient Comments: Ovarian Cysts - Pregnancy Experience
Patient Comments: Ovarian Cysts - Experience
Find a local Obstetrician-Gynecologist in your town
What should I know about ovarian cysts?
What 
are the ovaries 
and how big are they?
What are ovarian cysts?
What are the signs and symptoms of ovarian cysts?
What are the symptoms of a ruptured ovarian cyst?
What causes ovarian cysts? What are the types of ovarian cysts?
Can ovarian cysts cause cancer?
What about ovarian cysts during pregnancy?
Can a woman get ovarian cysts during menopase or postmenopause?
Which specialties of doctors treat ovarian cysts?
How are ovarian cysts diagnosed?
What is the treatment for ovarian cysts?
What about surgery for ovarian cysts?
What is the prognosis for a woman with ovarian cysts?
Can ovarian cysts be prevented?
Ovarian cysts are closed, sac-like structures within the ovary that are filled with a liquid or semisolid substance.
Ovarian cysts may not cause signs or symptoms. Larger cysts are more likely to cause signs and symptoms such as:Pain in the abdomen, pelvis, sometimes radiating to the low back, is the most common symptomFeeling of bloating or indigestionIncreased abdominal girthFeeling an urge to have a bowel movement or having difficult, painful bowel movementsPain during sexual intercourse (dyspareunia)Pain in the lower right or left quadrant of the abdomen on one sideNausea and vomiting
Pain in the abdomen, pelvis, sometimes radiating to the low back, is the most common symptom
Feeling of bloating or indigestion
Increased abdominal girth
Feeling an urge to have a bowel movement or having difficult, painful bowel movements
Pain during sexual intercourse (dyspareunia)
Pain in the lower right or left quadrant of the abdomen on one side
Nausea and vomiting
There are many causes and types of ovarian cysts, for example, follicular cysts, "chocolate cysts," dermoid cysts, and cysts due to polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS).
Most ovarian cysts are not cancerous.
Most ovarian cysts are diagnosed with ultrasound or physical examination. Transvaginal ultrasound is a common way to examine ovarian cysts.
The treatment of an ovarian cyst depends upon the cause of the cyst and varies from observation and monitoring to surgical treatment.
Rupture of an ovarian cyst is a complication that sometimes produces severe pain and internal bleeding. A ruptured (burst) ovarian cyst usually causes pain on one side that comes on suddenly.
