

Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a chronic behavioral condition that initially manifests in childhood and is characterized by problems of hyperactivity, impulsivity, and/or inattention. Not all patients manifest all three behavioral categories of ADHD. These symptoms have been associated with difficulty in academic, emotional, and social functioning. The diagnosis is established by satisfying specific criteria. ADHD may be associated with other neurological, significant behavioral, and/or developmental/learning disabilities. Therapy combines the use of medication, behavioral therapy, and adjustments in day-to-day lifestyle activities. ADHD is one of the most common disorders of childhood. ADHD occurs more commonly in boys than girls. While previously believed to be "outgrown" by adulthood, current opinion indicates that many children will continue throughout life with symptoms that may affect both occupational and social functioning.
Historical figures of diverse backgrounds and accomplishment have demonstrated behavior compatible with ADHD. Mozart composed and remembered entire musical compositions but disliked the tedious task and attention to detail necessary when transcribing to paper. Einstein would spend hours and even days sitting quietly in a chair doing "thought experiments," which included complex series of mathematical calculations and revisions. Ben Franklin failed in school due to his perfectionist and impulsive behaviors. He later mastered five languages (self-taught) and is highly respected as an author, scientist, inventor, and businessman (publisher).
Parenting a Child With Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) Center
ADHD Symptoms in Children Slideshow Pictures
Take the ADHD Quiz
Parenting a Child with ADHD Slideshow
Find a local Psychiatrist in your town
Childhood ADHD facts
What are the signs and symptoms of childhood ADHD?
What should parents do if they suspect their child has ADHD?
What are the causes of childhood ADHD?
What should parents of children with ADHD expect from their child?
What type of medical specialist can help diagnose and treat a child with ADHD?
What treatment options exist for a child with ADHD? How can parents help their child with ADHD?
What are the risks of the use of stimulant medication and other treatments?
What are other therapeutic approaches for children with ADHD?
Is childhood ADHD on the rise?
What is the outlook for a child with ADHD?
What can parents of children with ADHD do to help themselves?
