

Parry-Romberg syndrome is a rare disorder characterized by slowly progressive 
deterioration (atrophy) of the skin and soft tissues of half of the face 
(hemifacial atrophy), usually the left side. It is more common in females than 
in males. 


Initial facial changes usually involve the tissues above the upper jaw 
(maxilla) or between the nose and the upper corner of the lip (nasolabial fold) 
and subsequently progress to the angle of the mouth, areas around the eye, the 
brow, the ear, and the neck. The deterioration may also affect the tongue, the 
soft and fleshy part of the roof of the mouth, and the gums. The eye and cheek 
of the affected side may become sunken and facial hair may turn white and fall 
out (alopecia). In addition, the skin overlying affected areas may become darkly 
pigmented (hyperpigmentation) with, in some cases, areas of hyperpigmentation 
and patches of unpigmented skin (vitiligo). Parry-Romberg syndrome is also 
accompanied by neurological abnormalities including 
seizures and episodes of 
severe facial pain (trigeminal neuralgia). 


The onset of the disease usually 
begins between the ages of 5 and 15 years. The progression of the atrophy often 
lasts from 2 to 10 years, and then the process seems to enter a stable phase. 
Muscles in the face may atrophy and there may be bone loss in the facial bones. 
Problems with the retina and optic nerve may occur when the disease surrounds 
the eye.
Parry-Romberg Syndrome Center
Patient Comments: Parry-Romberg Syndrome - Signs and Symptoms
Patient Comments: Parry-Romberg Syndrome - Treatment
Find a local Doctor in your town
What is and what causes Parry-Romberg syndrome?
What are the signs and symptoms of Parry-Romberg syndrome?
At what age does Parry-Romberg syndrome occur?
Is there any treatment for Parry-Romberg syndrome?
What is the prognosis for Parry-Romberg syndrome?
What research is being done for Parry-Romberg syndrome?

            
            Readers Comments 7
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
