

*Pelvic inflammatory facts medical author: Melissa Conrad Stöppler, MD
Pelvic Inflammatory Disease (PID) Center
Take the Menopause Quiz
Essential Screening Tests Every Woman Needs Slideshow
Surprising Benefits of Sex Slideshow
Patient Comments: Pelvic Inflammatory Disease - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Pelvic Inflammatory Disease - Treatments
Patient Comments: Pelvic Inflammatory Disease - Risks
Patient Comments: Pelvic Inflammatory Disease - Diagnosis
Patient Comments: Pelvic Inflammatory Disease - Infertility
Patient Comments: Pelvic Inflammatory Disease - Experience
Find a local Obstetrician-Gynecologist in your town
Pelvic inflammatory disease facts*
What causes pelvic inflammatory disease?
How common is pelvic inflammatory disease?
Are some women more likely to get pelvic inflammatory disease?
What are the signs and symptoms of pelvic inflammatory disease?
What is the treatment for pelvic inflammatory disease?
What should I do if I think I have an STI (sexually transmitted disease)
How can I keep myself from getting PID?

            
            Readers Comments 5
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) is an infection and inflammation of a woman's pelvic organs including the uterus (womb), Fallopian tubes (tubes), ovaries, and cervix.
PID is very common and is estimated to affect around 1 million women every year in the US.
Pelvic inflammatory disease usually develops as the result of spread of a 
	sexually-transmitted disease (STD).
Most cases of pelvic inflammatory disease are caused by 
	gonorrhea and/or 
	Chlamydia, although several different types of bacteria can be responsible.
Young, sexually active women with multiple sex partners are at greatest risk for pelvic inflammatory disease. 
	Douching and a history of PID are other risk factors.
Pelvic inflammatory disease many not produce any symptoms or signs (referred to as being asymptomatic). In other cases it can cause 
	
		
		fever, 
		
		abdominal or
		pelvic pain, 
		
		
		vaginal discharge, 
		
		painful urination, or 
		painful sexual intercourse.
	
	

		fever, 
		
abdominal or
		pelvic pain, 
		

		vaginal discharge, 
		
painful urination, or 
painful sexual intercourse.
The treatment of pelvic inflammatory disease involves antibiotics directed against the organisms responsible for the disease.
Complications of untreated pelvic inflammatory disease can include scarring of the pelvic organs and 
	infertility.
Pelvic inflammatory disease can be life-threatening in severe cases.
