



A peptic ulcer (stomach or duodenal) is a break in the inner lining of the esophagus, stomach, or duodenum. A peptic ulcer of the stomach is called a gastric ulcer; of the duodenum, a duodenal ulcer; and of the esophagus, an esophageal ulcer. Peptic ulcers occur when the lining these organs is eroded by the acidic digestive (peptic) juices that the cells of the lining secrete of the stomach secrete. A peptic ulcer differs from an erosion because it extends deeper into the lining and incites more of an inflammatory reaction from the tissues that are involved, occasionally with scaring. Peptic ulcer also is referred to as peptic ulcer disease.
Peptic ulcer disease is common, affecting millions of Americans yearly. Moreover, peptic ulcers are a recurrent problem; even healed ulcers can recur unless treatment is directed at preventing their recurrence. The medical cost of treating peptic ulcer and its complications runs into billions of dollars annually. Recent medical advances have increased our understanding of ulcer formation. Improved and expanded treatment options now are available.
Peptic Ulcer Disease (Stomach Ulcer) Symptoms, Causes, Treatment, and Diet Center
Take the Pancreatitis Quiz
Boost Digestive Health
Digestive Distress Slideshow: Problem Foods to Avoid
Patient Comments: Peptic (Stomach) Ulcer - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Peptic (Stomach) Ulcer - Treatments
Patient Comments: Peptic (Stomach) Ulcer - Causes
Patient Comments: Peptic  (Stomach) Ulcer - Complications
Find a local Gastroenterologist in your town
Peptic ulcer (stomach, duodenum) definition and facts
What is a peptic ulcer?
What are the signs and symptoms of peptic ulcers?
Are peptic ulcers painful?
What causes peptic ulcers?
What does a stomach ulcer look like?
How are peptic ulcers diagnosed?
Is there a special diet for peptic ulcer disease?
What is the treatment for peptic ulcers? Can they be cured?
Antacids
H2 blockers
Proton-pump inhibitors (PPIs)
What are  the complications of peptic ulcers?
What is the prognosis for a person with peptic ulcer disease?
Which specialties of doctors treat peptic ulcers?
Peptic ulcer are sores in the lining of the esophagus, stomach or duodenum.
The main symptom of a stomach or duodenal ulcer is upper abdominal pain, which can be dull, sharp, or burning (a hunger-like feeling). (Bloating and burping are not symptoms of peptic ulcer, and vomiting, poor appetite, and nausea are uncommon symptoms of peptic ulcer.)
Other associated symptoms may include:Acid reflux or heartburnFeeling satiated (full) when eating
Acid reflux or heartburn
Feeling satiated (full) when eating
Peptic ulcer formation is related to H. pylori bacteria in the stomach and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications (NSAIDs) in 50% of patients. For the remaining 50% there are miscellaneous causes such as drugs, lifestyle factors (smoking), severe physiological stress, and genetic factors, but less frequently the cause is unknown.
Ulcer pain may not correlate with the presence or severity of ulceration.Diagnosis of an ulcer can be made with an upper GI series or endoscopy.
Treatment of the esophagus, stomach or duodenal ulcersaims to relieve pain, heal the ulcer, and prevent complications. Medical treatment involves antibiotic combinations along with stomach acid suppression medication, for example, antacids, proton pump inhibitors (PPIS) to eradicate H. pylori eliminating precipitating factors such as NSAIDs or suppressing stomach acid alone.
Complications of esophageal, duodenal or stomach ulcers include bleeding, perforation, and blockage to the passage of food due to gastric obstruction from the swelling or scaring that surrounds the ulcer.
If a person with peptic ulcers smokes or takes NSAIDs, the ulcers may recur after treatment.
