



Physiologic phimosis is present at birth and resolves without intervention. Most children will not have a fully retractable foreskin at birth, but do so as they get older with the majority having a fully retractable foreskin by early adolescence.
Pathologic phimosis is caused by scarring, balanitis, and underlying medical risk factors.


The inability of the foreskin to retract can lead to difficulty cleaning of the area which can cause balanitis. Other symptoms include:


Your doctor can diagnose phimosis based on a thorough history and physical examination. Additional tests are usually not necessary.


Treatment depends on the age of the male, severity, and resulting symptoms.
The first choice of treatment is usually a steroid ointment that is locally applied. This treatment has shown a success rate of over 70%. The ointment softens the foreskin and is applied for 4 to 6 weeks. Once full retraction is possible the ointment is discontinued.
If the steroid treatment is not successful, a circumcision might be beneficial. This depends on the underlying symptoms.
Phimosis vs. Paraphimosis: Symptoms, Causes, and Treatments Center
Impotence Slideshow Pictures
Sex-Drive Killers Slideshow: Causes of Low Libido
Take the Low Testosterone Quiz
Patient Comments: Phimosis - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Phimosis - Treatment
Find a local Doctor in your town
Phimosis definition and facts
What causes phimosis?
What are the signs and symptoms of phimosis?
How can I tell if I have phimosis?
What medications, creams, or ointments treat and cure this condition?
What is pharaphimosis?
What are the signs and symptoms of paraphimosis?
What causes paraphimosis?
How can I tell if I have paraphimosis?
What is the treatment and cure for paraphimosis?
Can circumcision prevent these penis problems?
What is the prognosis if I've had either of these penis conditions?
Phimosis is the inability to retract the foreskin behind the head (glans) of the penis.
Symptoms of may include:Difficulty or pain during urinationPainful erectionParaphimosis (A medical emergency where the foreskin can't return to it's normal location once retracted.)
Difficulty or pain during urination
Painful erection
Paraphimosis (A medical emergency where the foreskin can't return to it's normal location once retracted.)
This penis disorder usually is divided into physiologic and pathologic phimosis.Physiologic phimosis is the normal condition in which children are born with a tight foreskin, and separation occurs during late childhood and early adolescence.Pathologic phimosis happens because of an infection, inflammation, or scarring and usually is found in uncircumcised adult men.
Physiologic phimosis is the normal condition in which children are born with a tight foreskin, and separation occurs during late childhood and early adolescence.
Pathologic phimosis happens because of an infection, inflammation, or scarring and usually is found in uncircumcised adult men.

            
            Readers Comments 2
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
Difficulty urinating
Painful urination
Painful erection
Paraphimosis

            
            Readers Comments 1
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
