



A pneumothorax is a collection of free air in the chest outside the lung that causes the lung to collapse.


In some instances, the lung continues to leak air into the chest cavity and results in compression of the chest structures, including vessels that return blood to the heart. This is referred to as a tension pneumothorax and can be fatal if not treated immediately.


Symptoms of a pneumothorax include
The skin may develop a bluish color (termed cyanosis) due to decreases in blood oxygen levels.


The lungs normally inflate by increasing the size of the chest cavity, resulting in a negative (vacuum) pressure in the pleural space (the area within the chest cavity but outside the lungs). If air enters the pleural space either by a hole in the lung or the chest wall, the pressure in the pleural space equals the pressure outside the body. Thus, the vacuum is lost and the lung collapses.
Spontaneous pneumothorax is caused by a rupture of a cyst or a small sac (bleb) on the surface of the lung. Pneumothorax may also occur following an injury to the chest wall such as a fractured rib, any penetrating injury (gunshot or stabbing), surgical invasion of the chest, or may be deliberately induced in order to collapse the lung. A pneumothorax can also develop as a result of underlying lung diseases, including


A spontaneous pneumothorax, also referred to as a primary pneumothorax, occurs in the absence of a traumatic injury to the chest or a known lung disease. A secondary (also termed complicated) pneumothorax occurs due to an underlying condition.
Pneumothorax (Collapsed Lung) Symptoms, Causes, and Prognosis Center
Understanding COPD Slideshow
COPD (Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease) Quiz
Energy Foods for COPD Slideshow Pictures
Patient Comments: Pneumothorax - Describe Your Experience
Patient Comments: Pneumothorax - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Pneumothorax - Treatment
Pneumothorax (collapsed lung) definition and facts
What is a pneumothorax?
What is tension pneumothorax?
What are the signs and symptoms of pneumothorax?
What causes pneumothorax?
What are the types of pneumothorax?
Who is at risk for pneumothorax?
How is pneumothorax diagnosed?
What is the treatment for pneumothorax?
What is the prognosis for pneumothorax?
A pneumothorax is a collection of free air in the chest cavity (thoracic cavity) that causes the lung to collapse.
Pneumothorax may occur on its own in the absence of underlying disease; this is termed spontaneous pneumothorax.
Pneumothorax may also occur because of an injury or underlying lung disease.
A small spontaneous pneumothorax may resolve without treatment. A pneumothorax arising as a result of lung disease or injury requires immediate treatment.
Treatment may include insertion of a chest tube or aspiration of the free air in the chest cavity.

            
            Readers Comments 39
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
chest pain that usually has a sudden onset.
The pain is sharp and may lead to feelings of tightness in the chest.
Shortness of breath,
rapid heart rate,
rapid breathing,
cough,
and fatigue are other symptoms of pneumothorax.
cystic fibrosis,
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD),
lung cancer, asthma, and
infections of the lungs.

            
            Readers Comments 67
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
