



Premenstrual syndrome (PMS) is a combination of emotional, physical, psychological, and mood disturbances that occur after a 
woman's ovulation, typically ending with the onset of her menstrual flow. The most common mood-related symptoms are irritability, depression, crying, oversensitivity, and mood swings. The most common physical symptoms are fatigue, bloating, breast tenderness (mastalgia), acne, and appetite changes with food cravings.
A more severe form of PMS, known as premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD), also known as late luteal phase dysphoric disorder, occurs in a smaller number of women and leads to significant loss of function because of unusually severe symptoms. The American Psychiatric Association characterizes PMDD as a severe form of PMS in which anger, irritability, and anxiety or tension are especially prominent.


About 90% of women experience premenstrual symptoms at some point in their lifetime. The true incidence of PMS has often been overestimated by including all women who experience any physical or emotional symptoms prior to menstruation. It is estimated that clinically significant PMS (which is moderate to severe in intensity and affects a woman's functioning) occurs in 20% to 30% of women. It is generally most severe in women in their 4th decade of life. About 3% to 8% of women are believed to have the condition.


For certain women, the symptoms of PMS may be similar to those of early pregnancy, although this is highly individual. Many women do not experience symptoms in early pregnancy, while others may report breast tenderness, bloating, fatigue, and mood swings. These symptoms can be, for some women, similar to the symptoms of PMS or similar to the changes in their body they experience prior to the menstrual period. Unfortunately for women wondering whether specific symptoms are due to PMS or early pregnancy, the only definitive answer comes with the arrival of the menstrual period or a positive pregnancy test.



PMS remains an enigma because of the wide-ranging symptoms and the difficulty in making a firm diagnosis. Several theories have been advanced to explain the cause of PMS. None of these theories have been proven, and specific treatment for PMS still largely lacks a solid scientific basis. Most evidence suggests that PMS results from the alterations in or interactions between the levels of sex hormones and  brain chemicals known as neurotransmitters.

PMS does not appear to be specifically associated with any personality factors or specific personality types. Likewise, a number of studies have shown that 
psychological stress is not related to the severity of PMS.
Premenstrual Syndrome (PMS) Center
Take the Menopause Quiz
Essential Screening Tests Every Woman Needs Slideshow
Surprising Benefits of Sex Slideshow
Patient Comments: Premenstrual Syndrome (PMS) - Effective Treatments
Find a local Obstetrician-Gynecologist in your town
Premenstrual syndrome (PMS) definition and facts
What is PMS (premenstrual syndrome)?
How common is PMS (premenstrual syndrome)?
PMS vs. pregnancy symptoms
What causes PMS (premenstrual syndrome)?
What are the signs and symptoms of PMS (premenstrual syndrome)?
How long does PMS (premenstrual syndrome) last?
How is PMS (premenstrual syndrome) diagnosed?
What conditions 
mimic PMS 
(premenstrual syndrome)?
What treatments are available for PMS (premenstrual syndrome)?
What natural or herbal remedies help PMS (premenstrual syndrome) 
symptoms?
What medications are used to treat PMS 
(premenstrual syndrome)?
Can exercise help relieve some of the symptoms of PMS 
(premenstrual syndrome)?
Is there a "cure" for PMS (premenstrual syndrome)?

            
            Share Your Story
        
PMS stands for premenstrual syndrome.
Premenstrual syndrome is a set of 
specific physical and psychological features.
Physical symptoms of PMS include breast 
tenderness and bloating.
Psychological symptoms and mood swings 
are common in PMS and may include anger and depression.
PMS occurs in the last half of a 
woman's menstrual cycle.
The exact cause of PMS is unknown but 
is believed to be related to interactions between sex hormones and brain 
chemicals (neurotransmitters).
PMS must be distinguished from other 
disorders that produce similar symptoms. PMS symptoms also must, in some cases, 
be distinguished from early pregnancy symptoms.
The only way to distinguish PMS 
symptoms from those of early pregnancy in the absence of a menstrual period is a 
pregnancy test.
A helpful diagnostic tool for PMS is a 
menstrual diary.
Natural treatment options and home 
remedies for PMS include exercise, a healthy lifestyle, and emotional support 
from family and friends. 
Possible medical treatments to treat 
cramping and other symptoms of PMS include medications such as diuretics, pain 
killers, oral contraceptives, drugs that suppress ovarian function, and 
antidepressants.
The mood changes surrounding this 
condition have been described as early as the time of the ancient Greeks. 
However, it was not until 1931 that this disorder was officially recognized by 
the medical community. The term "premenstrual syndrome" was coined in 1953.
