

Primary sclerosing cholangitis describes a disease process in which the bile 
ducts in the liver become inflamed, narrow and prevent bile from flowing 
properly.
The liver produces bile to help digest food in the intestine. Bile from liver 
cells is transported through the bile ducts in the biliary tree, where it then 
enters the gallbladder. When food enters the small intestine, bile helps break 
down fat into fatty acids so that they can be absorbed and used by the body. 
This also helps in the absorption of fat soluble vitamins (A,D,E & K).
As the bile ducts become inflamed and narrow, bile cannot easily flow and 
begins to back up. This increases the pressure within the liver causing liver 
cells to become inflamed. Over time, this inflammation decreases blood flow 
within the liver, increasing the pressure in the portal vein. This eventually 
causes portal hypertension, a back up in the portal system causing veins that 
line the esophagus, stomach, and intestine to swell (varices) and the 
spleen to 
swell (splenomegaly).
As the disease progress, liver cells die and are replace by scar tissue. This 
is called cirrhosis and is associated with liver failure.
Primary Sclerosing Cholangitis (PSC) Center
Take the Liver Disease Quiz
Hepatitis Slideshow Pictures
Take the Alcohol Quiz
Patient Comments: Primary Sclerosing Cholangitis - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Primary Sclerosing Cholangitis - Medications
Patient Comments: Primary Sclerosing Cholangitis - Complications
Find a local Gastroenterologist in your town
Primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) definition
What causes primary sclerosing cholangitis?
What are the risk factors for primary sclerosing cholangitis?
What are the signs and symptoms of primary sclerosing cholangitis?
How is the diagnosis of primary sclerosing cholangitis made?
What is the treatment for primary sclerosing cholangitis?
Medications
Liver transplant
What complications are associated with primary sclerosing cholangitis?
Can primary sclerosing cholangitis be prevented?
What is the prognosis and life expectancy for a person with primary sclerosing cholangitis?

            
            Share Your Story
        
