

Primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) is a progressive disease of the liver caused 
by a buildup of bile within the liver (cholestasis) that results in damage to 
the small bile ducts that drain bile from the liver. Over time, this pressure 
build-up destroys the bile ducts leading to liver cell damage. As the disease 
progresses and enough liver cells die, 
cirrhosis and liver failure occur.
Bile is manufactured in the liver and then transported through the bile ducts 
to the gallbladder and intestine where it helps digest fats and fat soluble 
vitamins (A,D,E,K). When bile cannot be drained from the liver, it causes 
inflammation that leads to cell death. Scar tissue gradually replaces the areas 
of damaged liver and then the body cannot perform necessary functions.


The cause of PBC is unknown. It is most likely an autoimmune disease, where 
the body's immune system attacks its own cells. In this disease, the bile ducts 
are under attack and are destroyed.


Primary Biliary Cirrhosis (PBC) Center
Take the Liver Disease Quiz
Hepatitis Slideshow Pictures
Take the Alcohol Quiz
Patient Comments: Primary Biliary Cirrhosis - Experience
Patient Comments: Primary Biliary Cirrhosis - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Primary Biliary Cirrhosis - Diagnosis
Find a local Gastroenterologist in your town
Primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) definition
What are the causes of primary biliary cirrhosis?
What are the risk factors for primary biliary cirrhosis?
What are the signs and symptoms for primary biliary cirrhosis?
How is the diagnosis of primary biliary cirrhosis made?
What is the treatment for primary biliary cirrhosis?
What are the complications of primary biliary cirrhosis?
Can primary biliary cirrhosis be prevented?
What is the prognosis for someone with primary biliary cirrhosis?

            
            Readers Comments 9
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
There may be a 
	genetic component to the development of PBC since a 
	person 
with the disease is likely to have a family member also afflicted.
Women are nine times more likely than men to develop PBC. It most often 
develops in the middle age between the ages of 40 to 60.
The disease is seen more often in white, northern Europeans, compared 
to African-Americans.
