

Prostate Cancer Center
Prostate Cancer Slideshow Pictures
Medical Illustrations of the Prostate Image Collection
Men's Screening Tests Slideshow
Patient Comments: Prostate Cancer - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Prostate Cancer - Treatment
Patient Comments: Prostate Cancer - Evaluation and Diagnosis
Find a local Oncologist in your town
Prostate cancer facts
What is prostate cancer?
What causes prostate cancer?
What are the risk factors for prostate cancer?
What are the signs and symptoms of prostate cancer?
What specialists identify and treat prostate cancer?
What tests do health care professionals use to diagnose prostate cancer?
Prostate cancer biopsy results
How accurate is the PSA test?
What are the stages of prostate cancer?
What are the treatment options for prostate cancer?
Observation and active surveillance
Surgery for prostate cancer
Radiation therapy
Focal therapy
Cryotherapy (cryosurgery, cryoablation)
Hormonal therapy
Chemotherapy
Immunotherapy/vaccine therapy
Bone-targeted therapy
Bisphosphonates
Monoclonal antibody therapy
Radiopharmaceuticals
Castrate-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) and metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer (MCRPC)
Research techniques
Complementary and alternative care approaches
What is the prognosis for prostate cancer?
Is it possible to prevent prostate cancer?
The prostate is a gland that is a part of the male reproductive system that wraps around the male urethra at its exit from the bladder.
Common problems are benign (noncancerous) enlargement of the prostate called BPH (benign prostatic hyperplasia), acute and chronic infections of the prostate (acute and chronic bacterial prostatitis), and chronic inflammation of the prostate that is not related to bacteria (chronic prostatitis [non-bacterial]).
Prostate cancer is common in men over 50 years of age, with the risk of developing prostate cancer increasing with aging. Certain populations are at increased risk for developing prostate cancer, particularly African-Americans and men with a first-degree relative, father or brother, diagnosed with prostate cancer at a younger age.
Symptoms of prostate problems (and prostate cancer) include urinary problems such asdecreased force of urine stream;difficulty starting (hesitancy);the need to strain to urinate;stopping/starting of the urine stream (intermittency);frequent urination;dribbling;pain or burning during urination,erectile dysfunction;painful ejaculation;blood in urine or semen and/or deep back, hip, pelvic or abdominal pain;other symptoms may include weight loss, bone pain and lower extremity swelling.
decreased force of urine stream;
difficulty starting (hesitancy);
the need to strain to urinate;
stopping/starting of the urine stream (intermittency);
frequent urination;
dribbling;
pain or burning during urination,
erectile dysfunction;
painful ejaculation;
blood in urine or semen and/or deep back, hip, pelvic or abdominal pain;
other symptoms may include weight loss, bone pain and lower extremity swelling.
Prostate cancer screening consists of periodic laboratory testing, usually every one to two years, which includes a prostate specific antigen (PSA) test and digital rectal examination. Prostate cancer screening is not for everyone and the pros/cons should be discussed with a primary care provider and/or urologist (specialist who treats problems with the urinary system).
A concern for prostate cancer is raised when blood testing, PSA, is abnormally increased and/or an abnormal area of the prostate is felt on a rectal examination.
Prostate cancer is definitively diagnosed by removal of small cores of prostate tissue (prostate biopsies), which are then examined under the microscope by a pathologist.
Treatments for prostate cancer may include observation, active surveillance, surgery (radical prostatectomy), radiation therapy (external beam or placement of radioactive pellets into the prostate), hormone therapy, chemotherapy, immune/vaccine therapy, and other medical therapies that can affect prostate cancer cell growth.
Prostate cancer is a leading cause of cancer and cancer death in males; in some men, identifying it early may prevent/delay spread and death from prostate cancer.
