



The prostate gland is part of the male reproductive system, and it is a walnut-sized gland found in men that is located below the bladder and in front of the rectum. It surrounds the urethra, the tube through which urine and semen exit the body. Its main function is to produce seminal fluid in order to transport sperm through the urethra.

Prostatitis (Inflammation of the Prostate Gland) Symptoms, Causes, Treatment, and Cure Center
Impotence Slideshow Pictures
Sex-Drive Killers Slideshow: Causes of Low Libido
Take the Low Testosterone Quiz
Patient Comments: Prostatitis - Experience
Patient Comments: Prostatitis - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Prostatitis - Treatment
Patient Comments: Prostatitis - Complications
Find a local Urologist in your town
Prostatitis definition and facts
What is the prostate gland? What does it look like?
What are the signs and symptoms of prostatitis?
What causes prostatitis?
What are the risk factors for prostatitis?
What tests diagnose prostatitis?
What is the treatment for prostatitis?
What natural or home remedies relieve pain, symptoms, and treat prostatitis?
What are the complications of prostatitis?
What is the prognosis for prostatitis? Can it be cured?
When should you call your doctor if you think you may have prostatitis symptoms?

            
            Readers Comments 42
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
Prostatitis is inflammation of the prostate gland. The inflammation can be due to an infection as well as other various causes.
Prostatitis accounts for nearly 2 million visits per year to outpatient urology practices in the United States.
Ten to twelve percent of all men experience prostatitis symptoms.
Prostatitis is most common prostate problem in men under the age of 50.
Prostatitis can be an acute illness or a chronic condition, The NIH consensus definition and classification of prostatitis is:Acute bacterial prostatitis: Caused by a bacterial infection and it typically starts suddenly and may include flu-like symptoms. It is the least common of the four types of prostatitis.Chronic bacterial prostatitis: Described by recurrent bacterial infections of the prostate gland. Between attacks, the symptoms might be minor or the patient may even be symptom free, however it can be difficult to treat successfully.Chronic prostatitis/chronic pelvic pain syndrome: Most cases of prostatitis fall into this category; however, it is the least understood. Chronic prostatitis/chronic pelvic pain syndrome can be described as inflammatory or noninflammatory, depending upon the presence or absence of infection-fighting cells in the urine, semen, and prostatic fluid. Often no specific cause can be identified. The symptoms can come and go or remain chronically.Asymptomatic inflammatory prostatitis: This condition is often diagnosed incidentally during the work-up for infertility or prostate cancer. Individuals with this form of prostatitis will not complain of symptoms or discomfort, but they will have the presence of infection-fighting cells present in semen/prostatic fluid.
Acute bacterial prostatitis: Caused by a bacterial infection and it typically starts suddenly and may include flu-like symptoms. It is the least common of the four types of prostatitis.
Chronic bacterial prostatitis: Described by recurrent bacterial infections of the prostate gland. Between attacks, the symptoms might be minor or the patient may even be symptom free, however it can be difficult to treat successfully.
Chronic prostatitis/chronic pelvic pain syndrome: Most cases of prostatitis fall into this category; however, it is the least understood. Chronic prostatitis/chronic pelvic pain syndrome can be described as inflammatory or noninflammatory, depending upon the presence or absence of infection-fighting cells in the urine, semen, and prostatic fluid. Often no specific cause can be identified. The symptoms can come and go or remain chronically.
Asymptomatic inflammatory prostatitis: This condition is often diagnosed incidentally during the work-up for infertility or prostate cancer. Individuals with this form of prostatitis will not complain of symptoms or discomfort, but they will have the presence of infection-fighting cells present in semen/prostatic fluid.
