

*Pubic lice facts by John P. Cunha, DO, FACOEP


Also called crab lice or "crabs," pubic lice are parasitic insects found primarily in the pubic or genital area of humans. Pubic lice infestation is found worldwide and occurs in all races, ethnic groups, and levels of society.


Pubic lice have forms: the egg (also called a nit), the nymph, and the adult.
Nit: Nits are lice eggs. They can be hard to see and are found firmly attached to the hair shaft. They are oval and usually yellow to white. Pubic lice nits take about 6-10 days to hatch.
Nymph: The nymph is an immature louse that hatches from the nit (egg). A nymph looks like an adult pubic louse but it is smaller. Pubic lice nymphs take about 2-3 weeks after hatching to mature into adults capable of reproducing. To live, a nymph must feed on blood.
Adult: The adult pubic louse resembles a miniature crab when viewed through a strong magnifying glass. Pubic lice have six legs; their two front legs are very large and look like the pincher claws of a crab. This is how they got the nickname "crabs." Pubic lice are tan to grayish-white in color. Females lay nits and are usually larger than males. To live, lice must feed on blood. If the louse falls off a person, it dies within 1-2 days.
Pubic Lice (Crabs) Center
Sexually Transmitted Diseases (STDs) Slideshow Pictures
Take the Quiz on STDs
Impotence Slideshow Pictures
Patient Comments: Pubic Lice (Crabs) - Treatment
Patient Comments: Pubic Lice (Crabs) - Symptoms
Pubic lice facts
What are pubic lice?
What do pubic lice look like?
Where are pubic lice found?
What are the signs and symptoms of pubic lice?
How did I get pubic lice?
How is a pubic lice infestation diagnosed?
How are pubic lice treated?
Pubic lice (also called crab lice or "crabs") are parasitic insects found primarily in the pubic or genital area of humans.
Pubic lice may occasionally be found on other coarse body hair, such as hair on the legs, armpits, mustache, beard, eyebrows, or eyelashes. Lice found on the head are generally head lice, not pubic lice.
Signs and symptoms of pubic lice include itching in the genital area and visible nits (lice eggs) or crawling lice.
Pubic lice usually spread through sexual contact and are most common in adults. Pubic lice found on children may be a sign of sexual exposure or abuse. Pubic lice may be spread by close personal contact or contact with articles such as clothing, bed linens, or towels that have been used by an infested person.
Treatment for public lice includes a lice-killing lotion containing 1% permethrin or a mousse containing pyrethrins and piperonyl butoxide. These products are available over-the-counter without a prescription.

            
            Share Your Story
        
