



"Fibrosis" is a term used to refer to scarring, so pulmonary fibrosis means scarring throughout the lungs. 


The definition of "idiopathic" is "of unknown cause;" thus idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is fibrosis (scarring) of the lungs without a known cause.
IPF mostly affects middle-aged and older adults, and there is no cure. The progress of the disease varies from person to person, but often people diagnosed with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis live about three to five years following their diagnosis.

While the cause of IPF is unknown, it is thought that genetics may be a factor. When more than one member of a family has IPF, the disease is referred to as familial idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. 



Pulmonary fibrosis can be caused by many conditions including: 
In a condition known as hypersensitivity pneumonitis, fibrosis of the lung can develop following a heightened immune reaction to inhaled organic dusts or occupational chemicals. This condition most often results from inhaling dust contaminated with bacterial, fungal, or animal products. 
In some people, chronic pulmonary inflammation and fibrosis develop without an identifiable cause. Most of these people have a condition called idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) that does not respond to medical therapy, while some of the other types of fibrosis, such as nonspecific interstitial pneumonitis (NSIP), may respond to immune suppressive therapy. 
Synonyms (other names) for various types of pulmonary fibrosis that have been used in the past include chronic interstitial pneumonitis, Hamman-Rich syndrome, and diffuse fibrosing alveolitis. 
Pulmonary Fibrosis Center
Understanding COPD Slideshow
COPD (Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease) Quiz
Energy Foods for COPD Slideshow Pictures
Patient Comments: Pulmonary Fibrosis - Treatments
Patient Comments: Pulmonary Fibrosis - Experience
Patient Comments: Pulmonary Fibrosis - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Pulmonary Fibrosis - Cause
Find a local Pulmonologist in your town
Pulmonary fibrosis definition and facts
What is pulmonary fibrosis?
What is idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis?
What causes pulmonary fibrosis?
What are signs and symptoms of pulmonary fibrosis?
What are the signs and symptoms of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis?
What are the stages of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis?
Which specialties of doctors treat pulmonary fibrosis?
How is pulmonary fibrosis diagnosed?
What is the treatment for pulmonary fibrosis?
What about pulmonary rehabilitation for pulmonary fibrosis?
What are the complications of pulmonary fibrosis?
Can pulmonary fibrosis be prevented?
What is the prognosis and life expectancy for a person with pulmonary fibrosis?
Where can I get information to improve the quality of life for those with pulmonary fibrosis?
Pulmonary fibrosis refers to scarring 
of the lung tissue (fibrosis of the lungs).
Symptoms of pulmonary fibrosis include:
				
		
		Cough
		
		
		Shortness of breath or difficulty breathing
		Decreased
		exercise 
		tolerance
	
	
		
		
		Cough

		
		Shortness of breath or difficulty breathing
Decreased
		exercise 
		tolerance
The most common type of pulmonary 
fibrosis is called idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis; its cause is not understood.
A number of different medical 
conditions can also cause pulmonary fibrosis.
Causes of pulmonary fibrosis can 
include: 
	
		Environmental toxins
		Medications, chronic inflammation
		Infections
	
	
Environmental toxins
Medications, chronic inflammation
Infections
Treatment options for pulmonary 
fibrosis are limited as the disease is progressive (worsening over time).
The prognosis (outlook) is poor for 
pulmonary fibrosis. The survival (life expectancy) for most patients is less 
than 5 years.

            
            Readers Comments 28
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
Chronic inflammatory processes (sarcoidosis, 
	Wegener's granulomatosis)
Infections
Environmental agents (asbestos, 
	silica, exposure to certain gases)
Exposure to ionizing radiation (such as
	radiation therapy 
	to treat tumors of the chest)
Chronic conditions (lupus, 
	rheumatoid arthritis)
Certain medications
