

Pulmonary Embolism (Blood Clot in the Lung) Center
Deep Vein Thrombosis Slideshow Pictures
Take the DVT and PE Quiz
Spider & Varicose Veins Pictures Slideshow 
Deep Vein Thrombosis and Pulmonary Embolism FAQs
Patient Comments: Pulmonary Embolism (Blood Clot in the Lung) - Diagnosis
Patient Comments: Pulmonary Embolism - Venous Doppler
Patient Comments: Pulmonary Embolism - Thrombolytic Therapy
Patient Comments: Pulmonary Embolism - Experience
Patient Comments: Pulmonary Embolism - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Pulmonary Embolism - Treatment
Patient Comments: Pulmonary Embolism - Risk Factors
Pulmonary embolism definition and facts
What is a pulmonary embolism? What does it look like (picture)?
What are the signs and symptoms of pulmonary embolism?
What are the causes and risk factors for pulmonary embolism?
What tests diagnose pulmonary embolism?
PERC Rule for Pulmonary Embolus
Basic testing (CBC, electrolytes, BUN, creatinine blood test, chest X-ray, EKG)
Pulmonary angiogram
d-Dimer blood test
CT scan
Ventilation-perfusion scans
Venous Doppler study
Echocardiography
What is the treatment for pulmonary embolism?
Anticoagulation
Thrombolytic therapy
Can pulmonary embolism cause death?
Can pulmonary embolism be prevented?

            
            Readers Comments 10
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
Pulmonary embolism (PE) describes the blockage of a pulmonary artery or one of its branches by a blood clot or foreign material.
Risk factors for the blood clot (thrombus) that travels to the lung (pulmonary embolism) include prolonged immobilization, medications, including birth control pills, smoking, genetic predisposition, an increased number of red blood cells (polycythemia), cancer, pregnancy, surgery, or damage to blood vessel walls.
Symptoms of pulmonary embolism include:chest pain,shortness of breath,a cough that sometimes produces bloody sputumfast heart rateanxiety
chest pain,
shortness of breath,
a cough that sometimes produces bloody sputum
fast heart rate
anxiety
If not treated promptly, pulmonary embolism may lead to sudden death.
The diagnosis of pulmonary embolism may be difficult to make, and initially may be missed. Diagnostic strategies need to be individualized to each patient and situation.
Anticoagulation medication is the treatment for pulmonary embolism, and the patient may be required to continue treatment for a minimum of 3 to 6 months.
Prevention is the best treatment for pulmonary embolism, which can be accomplished by minimizing the risk factors for deep vein thrombosis (DVT).
