



Q fever is an uncommon infectious disease. Animals transmit the disease to humans (this sort of infectious disease is called a zoonosis). Most often, cattle, goats, and sheep transmit Q fever, but it can also come from cats, dogs, rabbits, and other animals. Rarely, it's possible for Q fever to spread from person to person. In 2010, there were 131 cases of Q fever in the United States reported to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; however, some people with Q fever have only very mild symptoms and so do not seek medical care. Therefore, the actual number of cases is probably larger. In most people, Q fever may cause high fevers, sweating, muscle aches, headaches, cough, chills, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, chest pain, and diarrhea. The disease can cause a chronic infection that can result in endocarditis (infection and inflammation of the valves of the heart). In March, 2013, the CDC published the first set of national guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of Q fever.
Q Fever Center
Bacterial Infections 101 Pictures Slideshow
Take the Tummy Trouble Quiz
Hepatitis C Slideshow Pictures
Patient Comments: Q Fever - Experience
Patient Comments: Q Fever - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Q Fever - Treatment
Find a local Doctor in your town
Q fever facts
What is Q fever?
Where does the name Q fever come from? What causes Q fever?
How does Q fever spread?
What is the incubation period for Q fever?
Who is at risk for getting Q fever?
Are there different forms of Q fever?
Does pasteurization prevent the transmission of Q fever?
What are the signs and symptoms of Q fever?
What types of specialist treat Q fever?
How do physicians diagnose Q fever?
Is Q fever contagious?
What is the contagious period for Q fever?
What is the danger of getting Q fever while pregnant?
Is Q fever deadly?
What complications may arise with Q fever?
If it is not Q fever, what else could it be?
What should people do if they have been exposed to Q fever?
Is there any treatment for Q fever?
What is the prognosis for Q fever?
Is there a vaccine against Q fever?
Is Q fever a bioterrorism threat?
Where can people find more information about Q fever?
Q fever is a highly infectious disease that can cause serious illness.
Q fever is caused by a bacterium called Coxiella burnetii; infected animals transmit Q fever to humans.
Q fever can occur in an acute form and a chronic form.
Q fever can cause complications of pneumonia, hepatitis, endocarditis, vasculitis, and chronic fatigue.
Q fever in pregnant women can result in miscarriage or premature delivery.
There is no vaccine for Q fever available in the United States.
Antibiotics can successfully treat Q fever.

            
            Readers Comments 2
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
