

Rothmund-Thomson syndrome is a rare condition that 
affects many parts of the body, particularly the skin. 


People with this 
condition typically develop redness on the cheeks between ages 3 months and 6 
months. Over time the rash spreads to the arms and legs, causing patchy changes in skin coloring, areas of skin tissue degeneration (atrophy), and small clusters of enlarged blood vessels just under the skin (telangiectases). These skin problems persist for life, and are collectively known as poikiloderma.


Rothmund-Thomson syndrome is also characterized by:

The varied signs and symptoms of Rothmund-Thomson syndrome overlap with features of other disorders, namely Baller-Gerold syndrome and RAPADILINO syndrome. These syndromes are also characterized by radial ray defects, skeletal abnormalities, and slow growth. All of these conditions can be caused by mutations in the same gene. Based on these similarities, researchers are investigating whether Rothmund-Thomson syndrome, Baller-Gerold syndrome, and RAPADILINO syndrome are separate disorders or part of a single syndrome with overlapping signs and symptoms.


Rothmund-Thomson Syndrome Center
Adult Skin Problems Slideshow
Quiz: Is Ringworm Contagious?
Gallery of Skin Problems Pictures
What is Rothmund-Thomson syndrome (RTS)?
What are the signs and symptoms of Rothmund-Thomson syndrome?
How common is Rothmund-Thomson syndrome?
What genes are related to Rothmund-Thomson syndrome?
How do people inherit Rothmund-Thomson syndrome?
What other names do people use for Rothmund-Thomson syndrome?
Where can I find information about treatment for Rothmund-Thomson syndrome?

            
            Share Your Story
        
sparse hair, eyebrows, and eyelashes; 
slow growth and small stature; 
abnormalities of the teeth and nails; and
gastrointestinal 
problems in infancy, such as chronic 
	diarrhea and vomiting. 
	
Some affected children develop a clouding of the
	lens of the eye (cataract), which affects vision. 
	
Many people with this disorder have
	skeletal abnormalities including absent or malformed bones, delayed bone formation, and low 
	bone density (osteopenia). Some of 
these abnormalities affect the development of bones in the forearms and the 
thumbs, and are known as radial ray malformations.
	
People with Rothmund-Thomson syndrome have an increased 
risk of developing cancer, particularly a form of 
	bone cancer called 
	osteosarcoma. These bone tumors most often develop during childhood or adolescence. 
	
Several types of skin cancer are also more common in people with this disorder.
	
