



SAPHO syndrome is a chronic disorder that involves the skin, bone, and joints. SAPHO is an acronym for the combination of synovitis, acne, pustulosis, hyperostosis, and osteitis.
Synovitis means inflammation of the joint lining (synovium). Typically, this is manifests as warmth, tenderness, pain, swelling, and stiffness of involved joints (arthritis).
Acne is a skin condition featuring tiny areas of inflammation with pus formation at the hair follicles. Acne occurs most commonly on the face and upper back.
Pustulosis is a very inflammatory skin condition resulting in large fluid-filled blister-like areas (pustules), typically on the palms of the hands and/or the soles of the feet. The skin of these areas peels and flakes (exfoliates).
Hyperostosis means abnormal excessive growth of bone. The hyperostosis of the SAPHO syndrome frequently is located at the points of the bone where tendons attach, generally in the chest wall.
Osteitis means inflammation of the bone. Patients with SAPHO syndrome can develop inflammation of the sacroiliac joints (sacroiliitis) as well as inflammation of the spine (spondylitis) which leads to stiffness and pain of the neck and back.
SAPHO Syndrome Center
Rheumatoid Arthritis Slideshow Pictures
Joint-Friendly Exercises to Reduce RA Pain Slideshow
Take the RA Quiz
Patient Comments: SAPHO Syndrome - Symptoms and Diagnosis
Patient Comments: SAPHO Syndrome - Treatment 
Find a local Rheumatologist in your town
SAPHO syndrome facts
What is SAPHO syndrome?
What causes SAPHO syndrome, and what are risk factors for developing it?
Is SAPHO syndrome related to other joint conditions?
What are the signs and symptoms of SAPHO syndrome?
How do health care professionals diagnose SAPHO syndrome?
What is the treatment for SAPHO syndrome?
What is the outlook (prognosis) for patients with SAPHO syndrome?
Is it possible to prevent SAPHO syndrome?
SAPHO syndrome is a chronic disorder that involves the skin, bone, and joints.
SAPHO is an acronym for the combination of synovitis, acne, pustulosis, hyperostosis, and osteitis.
Some researchers feel that the SAPHO syndrome is related to the group of arthritis conditions which typically affect the spine, called the spondyloarthropathies.
Treatment of SAPHO syndrome typically involves medications which reduce inflammation.
