



Shingles is a painful skin rash caused by reactivation of prior infection with the same virus that previously caused chickenpox, known as varicella zoster virus (VZV). VZV belongs to the herpes family of viruses, but it is not the same virus that causes genital herpes or cold sores on the mouth. When a person is infected with VZV in childhood, they typically develop chickenpox, but after the illness resolves the VZV remains in a dormant state in the nervous system and is never fully cleared from the body. Under certain circumstances, such as emotional stress, immune deficiency (from AIDS or chemotherapy), or with cancer, the virus reactivates and causes the skin and nerve inflammation known as shingles.
Shingles occurs most commonly in people over the age of 60, but anyone who has ever had chickenpox is at risk, including pregnant women. It has been estimated that up to 1,000,000 cases of shingles occur each year in the U.S.


Shingles and Pregnancy Center
Take the Shingles Quiz
Shingles Slideshow Pictures
Gallery of Skin Problems Pictures and Images Collection
Find a local Doctor in your town
Shingles in pregnancy facts
What is shingles?
What do shingles look like?
What are the signs and symptoms of shingles?
How is shingles diagnosed?
What is the 
	treatment for shingles in pregnancy?
Antiviral medication to treat shingles
Pain medication to treat shingles
Antihistamine medication to treat shingles
What are the 
	complications of shingles in pregnancy?
What is the outlook (prognosis) for shingles in pregnancy?
Can shingles in pregnancy be prevented?

            
            Share Your Story
        
Shingles is a painful, blistering 
	skin rash that results from reactivation of infection with the varicella zoster virus 
(VZV), the virus that causes
	chickenpox.
The rash of shingles can be extremely 
painful and typically occurs over the area of one nerve.
Antiviral medications are used to treat 
shingles. These drugs are safe to use in 
	pregnancy.
Other medications to manage shingles 
can include 	acetaminophen 
	(Tylenol and others) for pain relief or antihistamines for 
	itching.
Complications from shingles occur most 
often in older adults and are less common in pregnant women. 
Shingles in pregnancy typically heals 
without long-term problems for mother or baby.
