

Most skin cancers are locally destructive cancerous (malignant) growth of the skin. They originate from the cells of the epidermis, the superficial layer of the skin. Unlike cutaneous malignant melanoma, the vast majority of these sorts of skin cancers rarely spread to other parts of the body (metastasize) and become life-threatening.
There are three major types of skin cancer: (1) basal cell carcinoma (the most common), (2) squamous cell carcinoma (the second most common), which originate from skin cells, and (3) melanoma, which originates from the pigment-producing skin cells (melanocytes) but is less common, though more dangerous, than the first two varieties. Other rare forms of skin cancer include lymphomas, Merkel cell cancers, and cancers of other tissue in the skin, including sarcomas as well as hair and sweat gland tumors. In this article, we will only be reviewing the most common forms of cancers, basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma.


The most common risk factors for skin cancer are as follows.
Skin Cancer (Nonmelanoma Skin Cancer or Keratinocyte Cancer) Center
Skin Cancer Slideshow
Take the Skin Cancer Quiz
Sun-Damaged Skin Slideshow Pictures
Skin Cancer (Melanoma) FAQs
Patient Comments: Skin Cancer - Describe Your Experience
Patient Comments: Skin Cancer - Diagnosis
Patient Comments: Skin Cancer - Symptoms
Find a local Dermatologist in your town
What is skin cancer?
What are the risk factors for skin cancer?
Is skin cancer hereditary?
What causes skin cancer?
What are the different types of skin cancer?
What are the signs and symptoms of skin cancer?
When is a mole dangerous or high risk for becoming a skin cancer?
What are the most common sites where skin cancer develops?
How do physicians diagnose skin cancer?
What is the staging for skin cancer?
What is the treatment for skin cancer?
What kinds of doctors treat skin cancer?
What is the prognosis 
and survival rate for skin cancer?
Is it possible to prevent skin cancer?
Sunscreen use and vitamin D

            
            Readers Comments 7
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
Ultraviolet light exposure, either from the sun or from tanning beds. Fair-skinned individuals, with hazel or blue eyes, and people with blond or red hair are particularly vulnerable. The problem is worse in areas of high elevation or near the equator where sunlight exposure is more intense.
A chronically suppressed immune system (immunosuppression) from underlying diseases such as HIV/AIDS infection or cancer, or from some medications such as prednisone or chemotherapy
Exposure to ionizing radiation (X-rays) or chemicals known to predispose to cancer such as arsenic
Certain types of sexually acquired wart virus infections
People who have a history of one skin cancer have a 20% chance of developing a second skin cancer in the next two years.
Elderly patients have more skin cancers.
