

Sore Throat Causes, Symptoms, Home Remedies, and Medications Center
Anatomy of a Sore Throat Slideshow
Natural Cold & Flu Remedies Slideshow
Common Cold Prevention Slideshow
Patient Comments: Sore Throat - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Sore Throat - Home Remedies
Patient Comments: Sore Throat - OTC Remedies
Patient Comments: Sore Throat - Antibiotics
Patient Comments: Sore Throat - Experience
Patient Comments: Sore Throat - Strep Throat
Sore throat definition and facts
What causes a sore throat?
What are the differences between sore throat vs. strep throat?
What are the signs and symptoms of a sore throat?
If I am pregnant and have a sore throat, what medications are safe to take?
Is a sore throat contagious?
Is there a test to diagnose the cause of sore throats?
What natural home remedies relieve sore throat pain and other symptoms?
What OTC medications help relieve throat pain?
What can I do if I keep getting a sore or strep throat?
Can antibiotics cure a sore throat?
How can I prevent from getting a sore throat?
When should I see a doctor for a sore throat?

            
            Readers Comments 2
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
Most sore throats are caused by viruses or mechanical causes (such as mouth breathing) and can be treated successfully at home.
Sore throat symptoms include pain, burning, or scratching sensations at the back of the throat, pain when swallowing, and tenderness in the neck. In addition to a sore throat, other common signs and symptoms may be include:CoughingSneezingFever,Swollen lymph nodes
Coughing
Sneezing
Fever,
Swollen lymph nodes
Home remedies for sore throat include:Gargling wiht salt waterThroat sprays or lozenges (Do not give lozenges to young children beause they are a choking hazard.)Humidifiers
Gargling wiht salt water
Throat sprays or lozenges (Do not give lozenges to young children beause they are a choking hazard.)
Humidifiers
Any sore throat that has a rapid onset and is associated with a fever or tenderness of the front of the neck may be serious and should be seen by a doctor.
Any sore throat that causes difficulty swallowing (not just pain with swallowing) or breathing should be seen by a doctor.
Any sore throat that lasts for more than a week should be evaluated by a health-care professional.
If you are pregnant and your sore throat symptoms are severe or do not resolve in three days, seek medical attention.
Seek medical care immediately if you have a sore throat and are unable to take your medications, have heart palpitations, are lightheaded, or your tongue or lips swell.
