

Most spiders in the US are harmless. However, black widow and brown recluse spider bites are dangerous, and sometimes life threatening. Black widow and brown recluse spider bites need immediate medical treatment.
Spider bites are actually rare occurrences, and most presumed people that have been bitten by spider are likely due to another condition that mimics the symptoms or signs of a spider bite. Bites from most (non-poisonous) spiders cause local redness, irritation, and pain that usually can be treated at home.
Black widow spider bite symptoms are immediate pain, burning, redness, and swelling. Other signs and symptoms of a black widow spider bite are a feeling of a pinprick, and sometimes double fang marks on the person where the spider bit. Often, a person does not know that a black widow spider has bitten them.
Symptoms of a brown recluse spider bite are a mild sting followed by severe pain and local redness that usually develops within eight hours or more after the bite. Some brown recluse spider bites may include a purple or blue area around the bite, which is surrounded by a whitish ring and a large outer ring in a bull’s eye pattern. A fluid blister then forms at the spider bite site, and then sloughs off revealing a deep ulcer that may turn black. Other signs and symptoms of a black widow or brown recluse spider bite may include abdominal or joint pain, fever, nausea, and headache.
Spider Bites (Common Poisonous) Pictures, Symptoms, Treatment Center
Black Widow vs. Brown Recluse Slideshow Pictures
Bad Bugs Slideshow: Identify Bugs and Their Bites
Adult Skin Problems Slideshow
Patient Comments: Spider Bites - Type of Spider and Reaction
Patient Comments: Spider Bites (Black Widow, Brown Recluse) - Treatments
Patient Comments: Spider Bites - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Spider Bites - Brown Recluse
Patient Comments: Spider Bites - Black Widow
Find a local Doctor in your town
What should you know about spider bites?
What are the first signs and symptoms of spider bites that aren't not poisonous?
What are the signs and symptoms of a black widow spider bites (pictures)?
What are the signs and symptoms of a brown recluse spider bite (pictures)?
Can black widow or brown recluse spider bite symptoms be the same?
Are spider bites dangerous?
What should you do if a spider bites you?
What should you do if a black widow or brown recluse spider bites you?
