

Stiff-person syndrome (SPS) is a rare neurological disorder with features of an autoimmune disease. 


Stiff-Person syndrome is characterized by fluctuating muscle rigidity in the trunk and limbs and a heightened sensitivity to stimuli such as noise, touch, and emotional distress, which can set off muscle spasms. Abnormal postures, often hunched over and stiffened, are characteristic of the disorder. People with Stiff-Person syndrome can be too disabled to walk or move, or they are afraid to leave the house because street noises, such as the sound of a horn, can trigger spasms and falls. 


Stiff-Person syndrome affects twice as many women as men. It is frequently associated with other autoimmune diseases such as diabetes, thyroiditis, vitiligo, and pernicious anemia. Scientists don't yet understand what causes Stiff-Person syndrome, but research indicates that it is the result of an autoimmune response gone awry in the brain and spinal cord. 


The disorder is often misdiagnosed as Parkinson's disease, multiple sclerosis, fibromyalgia, psychosomatic illness, or anxiety and phobia. A definitive diagnosis can be made with a blood test that measures the level of glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD) antibodies in the blood. People with Stiff-Person syndrome have elevated levels of GAD, an antibody that works against an enzyme involved in the synthesis of an important neurotransmitter in the brain.
Stiff-Person Syndrome Center
Dementia Slideshow Pictures
Take the ADHD Quiz
Brain Foods Slideshow
Patient Comments: Stiff-Person Syndrome - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Stiff-Person Syndrome - Diagnosis
Patient Comments: Stiff-Person Syndrome - Treatment
Find a local Doctor in your town
What is Stiff-Person syndrome?
What are the signs and symptoms of Stiff-Person syndrome?
Who is affected by, and what causes Stiff-Person syndrome?
How is Stiff-Person syndrome diagnosed?
Is there any treatment for Stiff-Person syndrome?
What is the prognosis for Stiff-Person syndrome?
What research is being done for Stiff-Person syndrome?

            
            Readers Comments 13
        

            
            Share Your Story
        

            
            Readers Comments 12
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
