

Stroke Signs, Symptoms, Warning Signs, and Treatments Center
Understanding Stroke Slideshow Pictures
Take the Stroke Quiz
Atrial Fibrillation Slideshow: Causes, Tests and Treatment
Stroke FAQs
Patient Comments: Stroke - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Stroke - Treatment
Patient Comments: Stroke - Recovery
Patient Comments: Stroke - Signs
Patient Comments: Stroke - Type
Patient Comments: Stroke - Risk Factors
Find a local Hematologist in your town
Stroke definition and facts
What is a stroke?
What is the NIH Stroke Scale?
What are the risk factors for stroke?
What are the warning signs and symptoms of a stroke?
What are the signs and symptoms of a stroke?
What is a transient ischemic attack (TIA)?
What are the types of stroke?
What causes a stroke?
What tests diagnose stroke?
What is the treatment for stroke?
Can strokes be prevented?
Is recovery after a stroke possible?
What is stroke rehabilitation?
What is the prognosis for a person that suffers a stroke?
Which specialties of doctors treat stroke?
A stroke occurs when part of the brain loses its blood supply and stops working. This causes the part of the body that the injured brain controls to stop working.
A stroke also is called a cerebrovascular accident, CVA, or "brain attack."
The types of strokes include:Ischemic stroke (part of the brain loses blood flow)Hemorrhagic stroke (bleeding occurs within the brain)
Ischemic stroke (part of the brain loses blood flow)
Hemorrhagic stroke (bleeding occurs within the brain)
Transient ischemic attack, TIA, or mini stroke (The stroke symptoms resolve within minutes, but may take up to 24 hours on their own without treatment. This is a warning sign that a stroke may occur in the near future.)
A stroke is a medical emergency. The affected individual, family, friends, or bystanders need to call 9-1-1 (activate EMS) to access emergency care.
From onset of symptoms, there is only a 3 to 4 1/2 hour window to use clot-busting drugs (thrombolytics) to try to restore blood supply to the affected part of the brain.
Remember FAST if you think someone might be having a stroke:Face droopingArm weaknessSpeech difficultyTime to call 9-1-1
Face drooping
Arm weakness
Speech difficulty
Time to call 9-1-1
Causes of strokes include ischemia (loss of blood supply) or hemorrhage (bleeding) in the brain occurs.
People at risk for stroke include those who have high blood pressure, high cholesterol, diabetes, and those who smoke. People with heart rhythm disturbances, especially atrial fibrillation are also at risk.
Stroke is diagnosed by the patient's symptoms, history, and blood and imaging tests.
Depending on the situation, including the patient’s neurologic examination and severity of stroke, mechanical thrombectomy to remove a blood clot within a brain artery may occur up to 24 hours after onset of symptoms. This procedure is not available at all hospitals and not appropriate for all stroke patients.
You can prevent stroke by quitting smoking, controlling blood pressure, maintaining a healthy weight, eating a healthy diet, and exercising on a regular basis.
The prognosis and recovery for a person that has suffered a stroke depends upon the location of the injury to the brain.
