

Tension Headache Symptoms, Signs, Relief, Causes, and Treatment Center
A Visual Guide to Migraine Headaches Slideshow
Headache and Migraine Triggers Slideshow
Take the Migraines Quiz
Patient Comments: Tension Headache - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Tension Headache - OTC Drugs
Find a local Neurologist in your town
Tension headache definition and facts
What is a tension headache?
What are the signs and symptoms of a tension headache?
What causes tension headaches?
How are tension headaches treated and diagnosed?
What home remedies relieve pain and other symptoms of tension headaches?
What OTC and prescription medications treat pain and manage tension headaches?
What stress management techniques can help reduce headache pain, other symptoms, and the frequency of tension headaches?
Can tension headaches be prevented?

            
            Share Your Story
        
Tension headache is the most common type of headache.
Although the precise cause of tension headache is unknown, there are factors that seem to contribute to tension headaches, such asstress,impaired sleep, orskipping meals.
stress,
impaired sleep, or
skipping meals.
Different conditions may contribute to tension headaches such as vision problems or eye strain, overexertion, muscle strains caused by poor posture have all been associated with development of tension headache.
While certain foods (processed or aged foods, chocolate, and red wine) can trigger migraine headache, in some cases head and neck movement or physical exertion might trigger a migraine; this is not typical of tension headache.
Some individuals have both migraine and tension headache; additionally, tension headache can trigger migraine pain, and may be relieved by migraine medications. Symptoms of migraine includelight and sound sensitivity,nausea orvomiting, and(often one-sided) throbbing head pain which worsens with exertion
light and sound sensitivity,
nausea or
vomiting, and
(often one-sided) throbbing head pain which worsens with exertion
Both tension headaches and migraines are diagnosed by physical examination and headache history of the patient.
Treatments for tension headaches can include OTC and prescription pain relievers, exercise (including formal physical therapy), stress management and relaxation techniques, and alternative therapies.
