

*Trichomoniasis facts Medically Edited by: 
Melissa Conrad Stöppler, MD


Trichomoniasis is a sexually transmitted infection (STI) caused by a parasite. The parasite is spread most often through vaginal, oral, or anal sex. It is one of the most common STIs in the United States and affects more women than men. It is easily treated with antibiotics, but many women do not have symptoms. If left untreated, trichomoniasis can raise your risk of getting HIV.


Trichomoniasis is spread through:


Trichomoniasis is more common in women than men. It affects more than 2 million women ages 14 to 49 in the United States.
Trichomoniasis affects more African-American women than white and Hispanic women. The risk for African-American women goes up with age and lifetime number of sex partners


Most infected women have no signs or symptoms. If you do get signs or symptoms, they might appear five to 28 days after exposure and can include:
If you think you may have trichomoniasis, you and your sex partner(s) need to see a doctor or nurse as soon as possible.


To find out whether you have trichomoniasis, your doctor or nurse may:
A Pap test is not used to detect trichomoniasis.

If you have trichomoniasis, you need to be tested for other STIs too.
Trichomoniasis Infection Center
A Visual Guide to PMS Slideshow
Take the Menopause Quiz
Pelvic Pain Pictures Slideshow
Patient Comments: Trichomoniasis - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Trichomoniasis (Vaginal Infection) - Transmission
Patient Comments: Trichomoniasis (Vaginal Infection) - Causes
Patient Comments: Trichomoniasis (Vaginal Infection) - Diagnosis
Patient Comments: Trichomoniasis (Vaginal Infection) - Treatment
Patient Comments: Trichomoniasis (Vaginal Infection) - Telling Your Partner
Trichomoniasis facts*
What is trichomoniasis?
How do you get trichomoniasis?
Who gets trichomoniasis?
What are the signs and symptoms of trichomoniasis?
Is there a test to diagnose trichomoniasis?
What is the treatment to cure trichomoniasis?
What can happen if trichomoniasis is not treated?
What should I do if I have trichomoniasis?
Does trichomoniasis affect pregnancy?
Can I take medicine to cure trichomoniasis if I am breastfeeding?
How can I prevent from getting trichomoniasis?
Can women who have sex with women get trichomoniasis?
Trichomoniasis is a 
	sexually transmitted disease (STD) or sexually transmitted  infection (STI) 
	caused by a parasite.
Trichomonas infection can affect 
	women or men and is spread via sexual contact.
Many people who have the infection 
	have no symptoms, but when symptoms occur, they include 
		
			vaginal or urethral 
	(in men) discharge that may appear greenish and frothy; 
			
			burning on 
	urination; 
			discomfort during sex, and 
			
			itching in the genital area.
		
		
vaginal or urethral 
	(in men) discharge that may appear greenish and frothy; 

			burning on 
	urination; 
discomfort during sex, and 

			itching in the genital area.
Diagnosis is based upon identifying 
	the parasite through miscroscopic examination of the vaginal or urethral 
	discharge. This is the best test for Trichomonas infection.
Trichomonas infection can be 
	treated and cured with antibiotic medications. Antibiotics cure the infection, but it 
	may come back (recurr).
If trichomoniasis is not treated the infection can 
	persist over the long term. 
There are no effective home remedies for trichomoniasis infection.
		
Trichomonas infection 
		during pregnancy can lead to premature birth and low birth weight.

            
            Readers Comments 13
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
Vaginal, oral, or anal sex. Trichomoniasis can be spread even if there are no symptoms. This means you can get trichomoniasis from someone who has no signs or symptoms.
Genital touching. A man does not need to ejaculate (come) for trichomoniasis to spread. Trichomoniasis can also be passed bet

            
            Readers Comments 13
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
Irritation and itching in the genital area
Thin or frothy discharge (clear, white, yellowish, or greenish) with an unusual foul odor
Discomfort during sex and when urinating
Lower abdominal pain (this is rare)

            
            Readers Comments 3
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
Do a pelvic exam
Use a cotton swab to take a fluid sample from your vagina to look for the parasite under a microscope
Do a lab test, such as a DNA test or a fluid culture. A culture tests uses urine or a swab from your vagina. The parasite then grows in a lab. It takes up to a week for the parasite to grow enough to be seen.
