



Trichinosis is a disease caused by parasitic roundworms (nematodes) that can infect and damage body tissues. Nematodes are a major division of the helminth family of parasitic worms (for example, Trichinella spiralis). When ingested, these parasitic worms can pass through the intestinal tract to invade other tissues, such as muscle, where they persist. Trichinosis is also termed trichinellosis, trichiniasis, or trichinelliasis. Trichinosis is not to be confused with trichomoniasis, a sexually transmitted disease caused by the Trichomonas vaginalis parasite.
Trichinosis (Trichinellosis) Worm Infection Symptoms, Treatment, Life Cycle, and Cure Center
Take the Pancreatitis Quiz
Boost Digestive Health
Digestive Distress Slideshow: Problem Foods to Avoid
Patient Comments: Trichinosis - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Trichinosis - Treatment
Trichinosis infection definition and facts
What is trichinosis parasitic infection? Is it a sexually transmitted disease (STD)?
What are the signs and symptoms of trichinosis?
What causes trichinosis? Is it spread by pork?
How common is trichinosis?
How long do trichinosis parasites live?
What are the risk factors for getting trichinosis?
What are the complications associated with trichinosis?
What procedures and tests diagnose trichinosis?
What is the treatment and prognosis for trichinosis? Is there a cure?
What prevention steps can you take for trichinosis?
Where can I get more information on trichinosis?
Trichinosis is caused by eating raw or undercooked pork and wild game infected with the larvae of a parasitic worm.
The contaminated meat is infected with the larvae of a worm called Trichinella spiralis.
The initial symptoms of trichinosis are:
Abdominal discomfortNauseaDiarrheaVomitingFatigueFever
Nausea
Diarrhea
Vomiting
Fatigue
Fever
The severity of symptoms depends on the number of infectious worms consumed in the meat.
Never eat raw or undercooked pork or wild game.
If you think you may have trichinosis, seek medical attention.

            
            Readers Comments 5
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
