

Type 2 Diabetes Symptoms, Signs, Diet, and Treatment Center
Type 2 Diabetes: Learn the Warning Signs
Diabetes Friendly Dining
Type 2 Diabetes: Test Your Medical IQ
Type 2 Diabetes FAQs
Patient Comments: Type 2 Diabetes - Experience
Patient Comments: Type 2 Diabetes - Diet
Find a local Doctor in your town
Type 2 diabetes definition and facts
What is type 2 diabetes?
What are the signs and symptoms of type 2 diabetes?
What are the signs and symptoms of low blood sugar (hypoglycemia)?
What are the signs and symptoms of high blood sugar (hyperglycemia)?
What causes type 2 diabetes? Can it be reversed?
What is the difference between type 1 and type 2 diabetes?
Who gets type 2 diabetes (risk factors)?
Is there a blood test to diagnose type 2 diabetes?
What is the treatment for type 2 diabetes?
Is there a type 2 diabetes diet plan?
Can exercise help manage type 2 diabetes?
What medications treat type 2 diabetes?
Do people with type 2 diabetes have to take insulin?
What if I have type 2 diabetes and become pregnant?
What are the complications of type 2 diabetes?
Can type 2 diabetes be prevented?
What is the prognosis and life-expectancy for someone with type 2 diabetes?
Which specialties of doctors treat type 2 diabetes?

            
            Readers Comments 1
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
Type 2 diabetes is a condition in which cells cannot use blood sugar (glucose) efficiently for energy. This happens when the cells become insensitive to insulin and the blood sugar gradually gets too high.
There are two types of diabetes mellitus, type 1 and type 2. In type 2, the pancreas still makes insulin, but the cells cannot use it very efficiently. In type 1 diabetes, the pancreas cannot make insulin due to auto-immune destruction of the insulin-producing beta cells.
Type 2 can be caused by:Being overweightEating a lot of foods or drinks with sugar and simple carbohydratesArtificial sweeteners (sugar free sodas, sugar free foods) intakeLack of activity (sedentary behavior)Lack of exerciseStress and stress hormonesGenetics
Being overweight
Eating a lot of foods or drinks with sugar and simple carbohydrates
Artificial sweeteners (sugar free sodas, sugar free foods) intake
Lack of activity (sedentary behavior)
Lack of exercise
Stress and stress hormones
Genetics
Risk factors include:Having family members with diabetesBeing overweightBeing sedentary including watching more than 2 hours of TV per dayDrinking sodaConsuming too much sugar and processed food
Having family members with diabetes
Being overweight
Being sedentary including watching more than 2 hours of TV per day
Drinking soda
Consuming too much sugar and processed food
The signs and symptoms of this type of this type of diabetes are sometimes subtle. The major symptom is often being overweight. Other symptoms and signs include:Excess thirstUrinating a lotGaining or losing weight unintentionallyDark skin under armpits, chin, or groinFatigueUnusual odor to urineBlurry vision
Excess thirst
Urinating a lot
Gaining or losing weight unintentionally
Dark skin under armpits, chin, or groin
Fatigue
Unusual odor to urine
Blurry vision
Often there are no specific symptoms of the condition and it goes undiagnosed until routine blood tests are ordered.
A blood sugar level more than 125 when fasting or more than 200 randomly is a diagnosis for diabetes.
Treatment is with diet and lifestyle changes that include eating less sugary foods, and foods that are high in simple carbohydrates (sugar, bread, and pasta.)
Sometimes a person will need to take drugs, for example, metformin (Glucophage).
People with both types of diabetes need monitor their blood sugar levels often to avoid high (hyperglycemia) and low blood sugar levels (hypoglycemia).
Complications include heart and kidney disease, neuropathy, sexual and/or urinary problems, foot problems, and eye problems.
This health condition can be prevented by following a low glycemic load diet, staying physically active, and getting regular medical screenings.
The prognosis for a person with this health condition is estimated to be a life expectancy of 10 years less than a person without diabetes. However, good blood sugar control and taking steps to prevent complications is shortening this gap and people with the condition are living longer than ever before. It can be reversed with diligent attention to changing lifestyle behaviors.
