

Type 1 Diabetes Symptoms, Causes, Diet, Treatment and Life Expectancy Center
Type 1 Diabetes: Symptoms, Causes & Treatment
Take the Diabetes Quiz!
Avoid Diabetes Complications
Type 1 Diabetes FAQs
Patient Comments: Type 1 Diabetes - Experience
Patient Comments: Type 1 Diabetes - Symptoms
Find a local Doctor in your town
Type 1 diabetes definition and facts
What is type 1 diabetes?
What are the signs and symptoms of type 1 diabetes?
What is the difference between type 1 and type 2 diabetes?
Is type 1 diabetes a genetic (inherited) disease?
How do you develop type 1 diabetes (causes)?
What are risk factors for developing type 1 diabetes?
How many people have type 1 diabetes?
Type 1 diabetes and pregnancy
How is type 1 diabetes diagnosed?
What is the treatment for type 1 diabetes? Can it be cured?
Is there a type 1 diabetes diet?
Does exercise affect blood sugar levels?
What is the life-expectancy for someone with type 1 diabetes?
What are the complications of type 1 diabetes?
Can type 1 diabetes be prevented?
Which specialties of doctors treat type 1 diabetes?

            
            Readers Comments 1
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
Type 1 diabetes mellitus (formerly known as insulin-dependent diabetes or juvenile diabetes) is a condition in which the body stops making insulin. This causes the person's blood glucose level (blood sugar) to increase.
There are two types of diabetes, type 1 and type 2.
In type 1 diabetes, the immune system attacks the pancreas, which causes the pancreas to stop producing insulin.
In type 2 diabetes, the pancreas can produce insulin, but the body cannot use it.
The cause of type 1 diabetes is autoimmune destruction of the pancreatic beta cells, which can be caused by viruses and infections as well as other unknown factors. In many cases, the cause is not known. Scientists are looking for cures for type 1 diabetes such as replacing the pancreas or some of its cells.
Risk factors for type 1 diabetes are family history, introducing certain foods too soon (fruit) or too late (oats/rice) to babies, and exposure to toxins.
Symptoms of type 1 diabetes arefrequent urination,excess thirst,weight loss,skin infections,bladder or vaginal infections, andabdominal pain.
frequent urination,
excess thirst,
weight loss,
skin infections,
bladder or vaginal infections, and
abdominal pain.
Sometimes, there are no significant symptoms.
Type 1 diabetes is diagnosed by blood tests. The level of blood sugar is measured, and then levels of insulin and antibodies can be measured to confirm type 1 vs. type 2 diabetes.
Type 1 diabetes is treated with insulin and lifestyle changes. Specifically, meal planning to be sure that carbohydrate intake matches insulin dosing.
Complications of type 1 diabetes are kidney disease, eye problems, heart disease, and nerve problems (diabetic neuropathy) such as loss of feeling in the feet. Poor wound healing can also be a complication of type 1 diabetes.
Type 1 diabetes cannot be prevented, however, keeping blood sugar at healthy levels may delay or prevent symptoms or long-term complications. There is currently no cure for type 1 diabetes.
The prognosis or life-expectancy for a person with type 1 diabetes is good if blood sugar control is kept within a healthy range. The life expectancy for someone with type 1 diabetes traditionally has been about 11 years less than average, but that is changing as the prevention of complications improves and technology such as insulin pumps makes it easier for people to keep their blood sugar in a healthy range.
