

*Urinary incontinence (UI) in women facts medical author: Melissa Conrad Stöppler, MD
Urinary Incontinence in Women Center
Urinary Incontinence in Women Slideshow Pictures
Urinary Incontinence in Men Slideshow Pictures
Food & Drinks That Make You Gotta Go Slideshow Pictures
Patient Comments: Urinary Incontinence in Women - Experience
Patient Comments: Urinary Incontinence in Women - Treatment
Patient Comments: Urinary Incontinence in Women - When It Happens
Find a local Obstetrician-Gynecologist in your town
Urinary incontinence (UI) in women facts*
What is urinary incontinence? What are the signs and symptoms of female incontinence?
What are the types and causes of urinary incontinence?
How is incontinence evaluated?
What is the treatment for female urinary incontinence?
Hope through research
Where can people find more information on female urinary incontinence?
The definition of urinary incontinence in women is the unintentional loss of urine.
Urinary incontinence occurs more often in women than in men. Pregnancy, childbirth, and menopause may contribute to urinary incontinence in women.
Weak bladder muscles, overactive bladder muscles, and nerve damage may also cause urinary incontinence in women.
Urinary incontinence in women is common and treatable.
There are different types of urinary incontinence in women, including stress incontinence, urge incontinence, overactive bladder, functional incontinence, overflow incontinence, mixed incontinence, and transient incontinence.
Diagnosis of urinary incontinence in women may involve a physical exam, an ultrasound, urodynamic testing, and tests including cystoscopy, urinalysis, and a bladder stress test. The doctor will also take a medical history and may recommend keeping a bladder diary.
Treatment of urinary incontinence in women may include behavioral or nonpharmacologic treatments, like bladder training and Kegel exercises, medication, biofeedback, neuromodulation, surgery, catheterization, or a combination of these therapies.
Research is ongoing to discover new and better treatments for urinary incontinence in women.
