



Vulvodynia refers to pain in the area of the vulva and vaginal opening. Vulvodynia is considered pain for which there is no known cause. It is different from pain that is located deep in the pelvis or internally in the vagina. This article focuses on pain in the vulvar region and at the opening (introitus) of the vagina. Deeper vaginal pain can also occur due to infections, tumors, and conditions that cause more generalized pain in the pelvic organs.
Vaginal pain can be chronic and can last for years in some women. The degree of severity varies among women. It often occurs in the absence of physical signs or visible abnormalities. It can be severe and can interfere with sexual activity and cause painful intercourse (dyspareunia). However, there are a number of other causes of vaginal pain during or after sex.
Vaginal Pain Symptoms, Location, During Pregnancy Center
Patient Comments: Vaginal Pain and Vulvodynia - Medications
Patient Comments: Vaginal Pain and Vulvodynia - Home Remedies
Patient Comments: Vaginal Pain (Vulvodynia) - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Vaginal Pain During Pregnancy
Patient Comments: Vaginal Pain (Vulvodynia) - Prognosis
Find a local Obstetrician-Gynecologist in your town
Vaginal pain and vulvodynia definitions and facts
What is vaginal pain (vulvodynia)?
What are the signs and symptoms of vaginal pain?
What if you have vaginal pain and are pregnant?
What causes vaginal pain?
What are risk factors for vaginal pain? Who gets it?
What exams and procedures can diagnose the cause of vaginal paint? 
What is the treatment for vaginal pain and vulvodynia? Can the condition be cured?
What medications and home therapies can relieve vaginal pain?
What treatments and home remedies help relieve pain?
Vulvodynia (vaginal pain) refers to pain in the area of the vulva and vaginal opening for which no cause can be identified.
Vulvodynia is not related to sexually-transmitted diseases (STDs).
The exact cause of vulvodynia is not known.
Symptoms include a burning, throbbing, or aching pain that can be localized to one area of the vulva or more widespread.
Vaginal itching may be associated with vulvodynia.
Vulvodynia can be treated with medications and/or self-care (home remedy) measures. No one treatment is effective for all women.
Local anesthetics, local estrogen creams, antidepressants, and anticonvulsive drugs are examples of medical treatments for vulvodynia.
Biofeedback, exercises, and nerve blocks may benefit other women.
Vulvodynia is not associated with cancer or serious medical conditions, but it can be a source of long-term physical and emotional discomfort.
