

Vancomycin-Resistant Enterococci Center
Bacterial Infections 101 Pictures Slideshow
Take the Tummy Trouble Quiz
Hepatitis C Slideshow Pictures
Patient Comments: Vancomycin Resistant Enterococci (VRE) - Treatments
Patient Comments: Vancomycin - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Vancomycin-Resistant Enterococci (VRE)  - Causes
Patient Comments: Vancomycin-Resistant Enterococci (VRE)  - Precautions
Vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE) facts
What are vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE)?
What causes a vancomycin-resistant enterococcal (VRE) infection?
Are VRE contagious?
How are vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE) spread?
What are risk factors for vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE) infections?
What is the incubation period and contagious period for VRE?
What are the signs and symptoms of a vancomycin-resistant enterococcal (VRE) 
infection?
What types of doctors treat VRE infections?
How do physicians diagnose vancomycin-resistant enterococcal (VRE) infections?
What is the treatment for a vancomycin-resistant enterococcal (VRE) infection?
What is the prognosis of a vancomycin-resistant enterococcal (VRE) infection?
What are the complications of VRE infections?
Is it possible to prevent vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE) infections?
What precautions should people take when tending to someone with a vancomycin-resistant enterococcal (VRE) infection?
What research is being done on vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE)?
Where can people find more information on vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE) 
infections?
Enterococci (genus Enterococcus) are bacteria that commonly live in the bowel and are usually resistant to many antibiotics. VRE are enterococci that have become resistant to the antibiotic vancomycin.
There are only a few antibiotics that are able to treat VRE infections. However, newer antibiotics are being developed.
People can be colonized with VRE, meaning that the bacteria are living harmlessly in the body.
VRE causes infection when it invades the bloodstream or spreads locally. It can also be introduced directly into a wound.
Infection is more likely in people with chronic diseases like diabetes or patients who have recently received antibiotics. It is also more common in patients with indwelling devices like intravenous lines or urinary catheters and those with compromised immune systems.
VRE can cause many types of infections (for example, bloodstream infection [sepsis], urinary infection, abscesses, wound infections, pneumonia, heart infections [endocarditis], or meningitis).
To avoid spreading VRE from person to person, it is important to wash or decontaminate hands frequently, including before and after touching the patient or his/her environment. In the hospital, staff will also wear gowns and gloves when caring for a person with VRE.
The risk of VRE infection can be reduced by minimizing the use of indwelling devices such as intravenous lines and urinary catheters. The risk is also reduced by eliminating inappropriate use of antibiotics.
