

Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome is a specific type of abnormality of the electrical system of the heart. This syndrome causes a specific pattern on an electrocardiogram (Wolff-Parkinson-White pattern) and is linked to an episode of rapid heart rates, such as supraventricular tachycardia (SVT) or atrial fibrillation. Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome is a treatable medical condition. 
Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome is also referred to as WPW syndrome and pre-excitation syndrome.


Wolf-Parkinson-White syndrome can affect all ages but is usually diagnosed in children, adolescents, and young adults. Except in rare circumstances, Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome is not a hereditary condition.


The heart has internal electrical “wiring” that is essential for proper pumping of blood to the rest of the body. In some people, an abnormal extra “wire” is present. This additional connection can cause a short-circuiting that causes the heart to beat very rapidly. This causes abnormal electrocardiogram (ECG) testing with rapid rate rhythms called supraventricular tachycardia or SVT.  Of note, the presence of a cardiac arrhythmia such as SVT can be from other heart conditions that are not Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome.


Individuals affected by Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome can experience palpitations, rapid heart rates, difficulty breathing, and lightheadedness as well as near loss of consciousness and complete loss of consciousness. For the most part, these symptoms occur all of a sudden and are not associated with warning signs. Usually, there are no dramatic triggers, however, caffeine, alcohol, and exercise can cause the heart to start racing.
Wolff-Parkinson-White Syndrome (WPW Syndrome) Center
A Visual Guide to Heart Disease
Medical Illustrations of the Heart Image Collection
Take the Heart Disease Quiz!
Patient Comments: Wolff-Parkinson-White Syndrome - Symptoms
Patient Comments: Wolff-Parkinson-White Syndrome - Share Your Experience
Patient Comments: Wolff-Parkinson-White Syndrome - Treatment
Patient Comments: Wolff-Parkinson-White Syndrome - ECG
Find a local Cardiologist in your town
What is Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome?
Who gets Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome?
What causes Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome?
What are the signs and symptoms of Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome?
What are the potential complications of Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome?
How is Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome diagnosed?
What is the treatment for Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome?
What is the prognosis for Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome?
Can Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome be prevented?

            
            Readers Comments 8
        

            
            Share Your Story
        

            
            Readers Comments 36
        

            
            Share Your Story
        
